Jaiva-dharma

Translated by Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, Int. 
& Sarvabhävana däsa

All Rights Reserved ©2008 - 2011

No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form, by any means, including mechanical, electronic,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of
the publisher.



 Dedication

 Preface

 Introduction

 1.  Nitya-dharma, The Eternal Nature of the Living Entity, and
Naimittika-dharma, His Impermanent Religious Duties 

 2.  The Nitya-dharma of the Living Entity Is Pure and Everlasting

 3.  Naimittika-dharma: Impermanent Religious Duties Are Incomplete, Pedestrian,
Impure and Evanescent

 4.  The Nitya-dharma Is Vaiñëavism 

 5. Vaidhé-bhakti Is Nitya-dharma Not Naimittika-dharma

 6.  Nitya-dharma: Birth and Caste Differences 

 7.  Nitya-dharma and Saàsära, Material Existence

 8.  Nitya-dharma and Vaiñëava Behaviour

 9.  Nitya-dharma and Material Science and Civilization

 10. The Age and History of Nitya-dharma

 11. Nitya-dharma and Deity Worship

 12. Nitya-dharma: Sädhana, the Means of Attainment, and Sädhya, the Ultimate
Goal

 13. Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 
Part One: Pramäëa, Evidence, and Prameya, Truth

 14. Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana
Part Two: Çakti-vicära, A Description of the Potencies of Çré Kåñëa

 15. Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 
Part Three: The Jéva, the Eternal Individual Spirit Soul 

 16. Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 
Part Four: The Jéva Swallowed by Mäyä, the Illusory Energy 

 17. Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 
Part Five: The Liberation of the Jéva from the Prison House of Mäyä

 18. Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 
Part Six: An Analysis of Simultaneous Oneness and Difference

 19. Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 
Part Seven: An Analysis of Abhidheya, the Means of Attainment of Prema

 20. Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 
Part Eight: Abhidheya: Vaidhé Sädhana Bhakti, the Practice of Regulative
Devotional Service

 21. Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 
Part Nine: Abhidheya: Rägänuga-sädhana-bhakti, the Cultivation of Spontaneous
Devotional Service

 22. Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 
Part Ten: The Initial Discussion of Prayojana, the Highest Goal of Life

 23. Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 
Part Eleven: The Initial Discussion of Näma-tattva

 24. Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 
Part Twelve: Elucidation of Nämäparädha, Offences against Harinäma

 25. Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 
Part Thirteen: Elucidation of Nämäbhäsa, Clearing Offences against Harinäma

 26. An Introduction to Rasa-tattva, The Principles of Spiritual Mellow

 27. Further Consideration of Rasa-tattva, Part One: Anubhäva, Sättvika-bhäva
and Vyabhicäré-bhäva 

 28. Further Consideration of Rasa-tattva, Part Two: Mukhya-rati, Principal
Attachment

 29. Further Consideration of Rasa-tattva, Part Three: The Rasas of Çänta, Däsya
and Sakhya

 30. Further Consideration of Rasa-tattva, Part Four: The Rasas of Vätsalya and
Mädhurya 

 31. Mädhurya-rasa, The Supremely Sweet Conjugal Mellow, Part One

 32. Mädhurya-rasa, Part Two

 33. Mädhurya-rasa, Part Three

 34. Mädhurya-rasa, Part Four

 35. Mädhurya-rasa, Part Five

 36. Mädhurya-rasa, Part Six

 37. Çåìgära-rasa, The Perfection of the Conjugal Mellow, Part One

 38. Çåìgära-rasa, Part Two 

 39. Entering the Pastimes of the Lord

 40. Sampatti-daçä: The State of Perfection

 Appendix 



Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura

Translated by Çréman Sarvabhävana däsa

Edited by Çréman Keçédamana däsa 

JDH Dedication

Dedication

In 1896, Çréla Bhaktivinode Öhäkura completed the Jaiva-dharma and made a
remarkable prediction, “A personality will soon appear to preach the teachings
of Çré Caitanya and move unrestrictedly over the whole world with his message.”
1896 was also the birth year of the great personality who would become His
Divine Grace Çréla A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda. Çréla Prabhupäda would
witness the first aeroplane flight and the start of modern-day jet travel. Using
these new convenience—unimagined in the days of the Öhäkura—from 1966 to His
disappearance in 1977, Çréla Prabhupäda would circle the globe fourteen times
and with the founding of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
spread the teachings of the Golden Avatära, Çré Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu,
unrestrictedly to every town and village of the world. In this way, Çréla
Prabhupäda also fulfilled the prediction of Mahäprabhu, who said five hundred
years earlier in the Çré Caitanya-bhägavata, “In every town and village, my name
will be sung.” We humbly dedicate the publication of this volume to Çréla
Prabhupäda and pray for his blessings.

JDH Preface

Preface

In London, on the appearance day celebration of Çréla Sac-cid-änanda
Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura, September 23, 1969, His Divine Grace Çréla A. C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda, the founder äcärya of the International Society
for Krishna Consciousness, gave a lecture on the life and teachings of the
Öhäkura. In the lecture, Çréla Prabhupäda explained:

“So Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura happens to be an äcärya, one of the äcäryas. And he has
left behind him many books—Caitanya-çikñämåta, Jaiva-dharma. These are very
important books. They’re in Bengali and Sanskrit… ...So we are trying to present
Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura’s books also in an English translation. Gradually you will
get them.”

We are now most happy to fulfill the desire of Çréla Prabhupäda with the
publication of this volume of Jaiva-dharma, an invaluable compendium of Vaiñëava
philosophy and practice, fully elucidating the intrinsic and essential function
of the individual soul in the union of transcendental love with the Supreme
Soul, Çré Kåñëa. Every effort has been made to render the Öhäkura’s original
Bengali text into readable and literary English with the highest priority given
to accuracy in translation.

Your servants at the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust

JDH Introduction

Introduction

This book, Jaiva-dharma, is a guide for those fortunate souls whose hearts yearn
to attain the highest platforms of kåñëa-prema. As such, it is the ecstatic
endeavour of the author, Çréla Bhaktivinode Öhäkura, to fulfill the desire of
his beloved Lord, Çré Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu. 

In Chapter Two, the Öhäkura defines jaiva-dharma, “The unblemished pristine love
for the Supreme Absolute Whole experienced by the minute particle of spiritual
substance—the jéva—is defined as jaiva-dharma.” To bestow this unblemished
kåñëa-prema, transcendental love of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, upon the
fallen souls of the material creation was, in part, the mission of the Golden
Avatära, Çré Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu. 

Ecstatic love is the intrinsic nature of the relationship between the
all-attractive Supreme Person, Çré Kåñëa, and His dear eternal servants, the
jévas, the individual souls. However, just as the unlimited Lord is supremely
independent, the tiny jévas, partaking of His nature, are minutely independent.
The free exercise of this minute independence is a prerogative bestowed by the
merciful Lord upon His servants and finds its defining characteristic in the
choice between selfless service to the Lord and selfish service by the jéva to
his own self. These mutually exclusive alternatives define the subsequent
spheres of activity of the jéva. Those fortunate souls who surrender to the Lord
live eternally under the shelter of His internal spiritual energy, engaged in
His ecstatic pastimes with hearts that know only pure transcendental love. Ever
attentive to the satisfaction of the Lord and their fellow servants, they
eternally perceive and interact with Him and His associates, immersed in
unlimited intoxicating happiness. They attain their innate constitutional
relationship with the Lord as His transcendental servants, friends, parental
figures, and conjugal lovers; thus their jaiva-dharma, intrinsic nature, of
ecstatic attachment to Godhead finds unrestricted expression in the union of
love with the Lord in His transcendental abode. 

The same cannot be said for those souls who reject the Lord and His service; for
them there is no station in the spiritual world. Mäyädevé, the great mistress of
the mundane universes manifested by the external material energy of the Lord,
beckons such souls and covers their spiritual nature with the cloth of the
subtle mental body and the outer dress of the gross material body. Now forgetful
of the Lord and their natural spiritual relationship with Him, they are
subjugated by the illusory potency and consider themselves a product of the
inferior material nature. In a mood of rebellion against the supremacy of the
Lord and thereby their own innate spiritual constitution, they consider their
self to be the external material body and items in relationship to the body to
be their rightful possessions. With such a false conclusion, fear and anxiety
pervade their consciousness as they consider death to be the inevitable
all-devouring end; thus, they launch into material life attempting to control
and enjoy before the final curtain falls. Pushed and pulled by repulsion and
attraction in the alien environment of the mundane energy, in bewilderment, they
foolishly fear no sinful activity and become increasingly mad after material
enjoyment. However, they are bound by the laws of karma, and when the time comes
their particular mixture of pious and impious activity defines their next arena
of attempted material enjoyment: They find themselves reborn in another material
body. Thus, their karmic reactions sometimes heave them up to Paradise in the
higher, more subtle material planetary systems or sometimes throw them down to
Hell. Ignorant of their previous births, the forlorn jévas rotate ceaselessly
through the multifarious bodies of the lower material creation. Sometimes they
attain birth as a human, sometimes as an animal, sometimes as a tree, and
sometimes as an insect. 

Attaining rebirth within a human body, the jéva may enquire into the ultimate
truth of existence, but still harbouring a rebellious mentality he becomes
swayed by philosophies that deny service in surrender to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. Lamentably, the jéva becomes absorbed in voidism and
impersonalism, which define the infinitesimal jéva to be the ultimate and
highest reality. In such madness, the jéva offensively considers himself the
Supreme; thus, degrading himself even further than he did by previous purely
sensual pursuits. With misery and ignorance as his constant companions, the jéva
thus continually sojourns throughout the practically unlimited species of
material life. 

How can this cycle be broken? How can the jéva uncover the lost treasure within
his heart? How can he uncover his now dormant jaiva-dharma, eternal ecstatic
kåñëa-prema, transcendental love of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré
Kåñëa?

To answer these questions, Çré Krsna descends periodically from the spiritual
realm, either in His original form or in the form of one of His multifarious
avatäras, to manifest His pastimes within the prison house of His external
material creation. The Vedas, the grand handbooks of material and spiritual
knowledge, inform us that time in the material world moves in a cyclic continuum
of four ages known as yugas. The present age is known as Kali-yuga, beginning
five thousand years ago when the highest manifestation of the Supreme Person,
Çri Kåñëa, returned to his transcendental abode after displaying His pastimes of
transcendence at Mathurä-maëòala, India. 

The material conditions vary with each yuga, so in each yuga an avatära appears
to teach the particular spiritual practice that is most effective for that age
in uncovering the innate jaiva-dharma of the fallen souls. These divine
manifestations are known as yuga-avatäras. 

In the Çrémad Bhägavatam, the book described as the ripened fruit of the desire
tree that is the Vedas, the yuga-avatära for Kali-yuga is described:

kåñëa-varëaà tviñäkåñëaà säìgopäìgästra-pärñadam
yajïaiù saìkértana-präyair yajanti hi su-medhasaù

“In the age of Kali, intelligent persons perform congregational chanting to
worship the incarnation of Godhead who constantly sings the names of Kåñëa.
Although His complexion is not blackish, He is Kåñëa Himself. He is accompanied
by His associates, servants, weapons and confidential companions.” (11.5.32)

This kali-yuga-avatära is Çré Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu, who advented Himself in
Çré Mäyäpura-dhäma, Navadvépa, West Bengal, India, on the Phälguné Pürëimä
evening in the year 1407 Çakäbda (corresponding to February 1486) as the full
moon arose under an eclipse. His life and teachings are most cogently described
in four books: the Caitanya-bhägavata of Çréla Våndävana däsa Öhäkura, the
Caitanya-caritämåta of Çréla Kåñëa däsa Kaviräja, the Caitanya-maìgala of Locana
däsa Öhäkura, and the Çré Caitanya-carita of Çréla Muräri Gupta.

In second chapter of the Caitanya-bhägavata of Çréla Våndävana däsa Öhäkura, we
find description of the birth of the kali-yuga-avatära, Çré Kåñëa Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, during the simultaneous lunar eclipse:

“Upon seeing the lunar eclipse, the residents of Navadvépa began to loudly chant
harinäma and make other auspicious sounds. 
“Endless teeming millions congregated on the banks of the Ganges for holy
ablutions and rent the air with loud chanting of the Lord’s name. 
“All the devotees experienced deep exhilaration and exclaimed, ‘Such great joy!
Maybe the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, is making His appearance.’
“The only sound within the universe was the all-prevailing chanting of, “Hari!
Hari! Hari! Hari!” 
“Amidst the resounding adulations, the Lord and the very soul of the universe
appeared as the son of Çrématé Çacédevé. 
“Rähu eclipsed the moon; the ocean of the Holy Name inundated Navadvépa,
drowning and subduing the darkness of Kali-yuga. The Supreme Lord was manifest!”

From the moment of His appearance, Çré Caitanya revealed His mission. He would
establish the fallen souls of Kali-yuga in their innate jaiva-dharma by
inaugurating the hari-näma saìkértana-yajïa, the transcendental sacrifice of the
congregational chanting of Çré Kåñëa-näma. Herein lies a most esoteric aspect of
the avatära of Çré Caitanya. Çré Caitanya is Çré Kåñëa Himself, however
intrigued by the position of His greatest devotee, Çrématé Rädhäräné, Çré Kåñëa
clothes Himself in Her mood and complexion, entering the mood of devotion to
Himself. Thus, He fulfils His desire to experience the role of a devotee, taste
the nectar of His own service, and understand the qualities of Himself which so
attract His devotees. Thus internally absorbed in the divine nectar of
kåñëa-prema, transcendental love of Godhead, He becomes anxious to distribute
this intoxicating beverage to all lost souls without discrimination, thus
bestowing upon them their jaiva-dharma.

Çré Caitanya declares in the Caitanya-caritämåta, Ädi-lélä 3.19-20:

yuga-dharma pravartäimu näma-saìkértana
cäri bhäva-bhakti diyä näcämu bhuvana

äpani karimu bhakta-bhäva aìgékäre
äpani äcari’ bhakti çikhäimu sabäre

“I shall personally inaugurate the religion of the age—näma-saìkértana, the
congregational chanting of Çré Kåñëa-näma. I shall make the world dance in
ecstasy, realizing the four mellows of loving devotional service. I shall accept
the role of a devotee, and I shall teach devotional service by practicing it
Myself.”

In this mission, the Lord is accompanied by four intimate associates—Çré
Nityänanda Prabhu, Çré Advaita Äcärya Prabhu, Çri Gadädhara Paëòita and Çré
Çréväsa Paëòita—who together with the Lord form the païca-tattva, the five
aspects of the Absolute Truth. 

Çré Caitanya though renowned in His early life as the greatest of scholars, Çré
Nimäi Paëòita, left us only one composition, the Çré Çikñäñöakam. However,
within these eight verses of four lines, all the transcendental truths of the
Vaisnava philosophy taught by Çré Caitanya are contained in a highly condensed
form. The Lord ordered His disciples, the foremost of which were known as the
Six Gosvämés, to write books expanding and propounding these truths, a task
which the followers of Çré Caitanya have continued to the present day. 

What then is the weapon of Çré Caitanya, as mentioned in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam
çloka above? In chapter two of the Caitanya-bhägavata Çréla Våndävana däsa
Öhäkura describes the Lord’s weapon, which became evident from the moment of His
birth:

“His beautifully brilliant golden lustre overshadowed the sun’s shining rays and
dazzled my eyes. His large, blossoming, softly upturned, lotus eyes defied
description. 
“His exquisite complexion was the colour of glowing sandalwood paste. His
expansive breast was decorated with a gently swaying wildflower garland and His
radiant, moon-like face was pleasing, cooling and comforting. His elongated arms
reached down to His knees. 
“The Golden Moon, Çré Caitanya, had arisen as sounds of great joy filled the
air. His beauty humbled a million cupids, and at His own dancing and singing, He
smiled. 
“His lovely face and charming eyes added to the marks of divinity upon His
transcendental person; His feet were marked with the auspicious signs of the
flag and lightning. His entire exquisite form was decorated to enchant the minds
of everyone.”

In this incarnation, the Lord’s infinite transcendental beauty would attract all
souls and sever their attachments to the material world, enchanting them with
kåñëa-prema. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, one of the Six Gosvämés wrote as recorded in
the Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya 19.53:

namo mahä-vadänyäya kåñëa-prema-pradäya te
kåñëäya kåñëa-caitanya-nämne gaura-tviñe namaù

“I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa Caitanya, who
is more magnanimous than any other avatära, even Kåñëa Himself, because He is
bestowing freely what no one else has ever given—pure love of Kåñëa.”

In Kali-yuga, the condition of human society is more degraded than at any other
time in the cycle of ages; however, the Vedic sages glorify Kali-yuga as the
best of ages since in this age the most magnanimous avatära, Çré Caitanya, has
appeared. One should understand the nature of Çré Caitanya’s compassion: He
gives the most degraded souls (the residents of Kali-yuga) the highest
attainment (kåñëa-prema) with the most sublime and simple practice (the
congregational chanting of the Holy Name).

Çré Caitanya, the son of Çré Jagannätha Miçra, a learned brähmaëa from Sylhet,
exhibited His transcendental pastimes for forty-eight years and then disappeared
in the year 1455 Çakäbda (1534) at Puré in Orissa. The first twenty-four years
the Lord exemplified household life. He was the devoted son of His mother, Çri
Çacédevé, a daughter of Çréla Nélämbara Cakravarté, the great learned scholar of
Navadvépa, and married the most beautiful Çré Lakñmépriyä. At that time,
Navadvépa was the centre of learning in all India and even in His childhood the
Lord, then known as Çré Nimäi Paëòita, was unquestionably recognised as the
crest jewel of scholars when he defeated in debate the great Kashmir scholar
named Keçava Käçméré. While the Lord was away travelling and teaching, his first
wife, Çré Lakñmépriyä, unable to bear His separation, left this world. At the
request of His mother, the Lord married again in great pomp and ceremony to the
divine Çré Viñëupriyä. Displaying to the world the necessity of taking a
spiritual master, the Lord was initiated by Çré Éçvara Puré, and from this point
progressively changed from Nimäi, the unconquerable paëòita, to Nimäi, the
devotee of the Supreme Personality, Çré Kåñëa. 

Çri Çacémätä had had eight daughters before Nimäi was born and all of them had
expired at an early age. Çré Viçvarüpa, Nimäi’s elder brother, soon left hearth
and home to become a wandering sannyäsé and Nimäi felt increasing drawn to take
this direction in life, the surrender of everything in devotion to the Supreme
Lord. When Çré Jagannätha Miçra departed this world, Nimäi was the only support
for His mother and new wife, however the call of a life totally dedicated to the
service of Çré Kåñëa was too strong and at the age of twenty-four the Lord
shaved off His beautiful locks to take sannyäsa. His sannyäsa guru was Çré
Keçava Bhäraté, who bestowed upon the Lord the sannyäsa name, Çré Kåñëa
Caitanya.

After taking sannyäsa, the Lord made His headquarters at Jagannätha Puré at the
request of His mother, Çri Çacédevé, and was based there for the remaining
twenty-four years of His life. For six years of this time, the Lord travelled
widely throughout India, particularly in the South. He met all the big religious
teachers of the time and in debate with them established pure devotion to Çré
Kåñëa as the sublime goal and necessity for all souls. This He did upon the
basis of the Bhagavad-gétä and the Çrémad Bhägavatam, the teachings of which He
also propagated widely by practical demonstration, thus becoming known as
Mahäprabhu, the great teacher. In this way, the august hari-näma saìkértana
movement was 

However, by the time Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura took birth on September 2, 1838,
the sublime transcendental tenets of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu had largely been
forgotten. Born in the ancient village of Birnagar (Ulägräm) in the Nadia
district of West Bengal, Çréla Bhaktivinoda was the third son of Änanda-candra
Datta and Jagat-mohéni, both of whom belonged to wealthy and eminent families.
His father named him Kederanätha, a name of Lord Çiva. Talented and thoughtful,
from an early age Kederanätha Datta began to search for the essence of life.
After marriage and his studies in Calcutta, during which his great literary
abilities became evident, this search led him to acquire copies of Çré
Caitanya-caritämåta and Çrémad-Bhägavatam. After reading these two books,
Kederanätha became an ardent devotee of Çré Kåñëa and Çré Kåñëa Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, whom he termed “the Eastern Saviour.” He took as his life’s mission
the revival of the teachings of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu in their original
pristine purity. Simultaneously, he pursued a career in the British
administration that then ruled India, eventually rising to the most respectable
position of Deputy Magistrate.

In the late nineteenth century, Vaiñëavism was under siege in India. Economic
development and sensual pursuits were the programme for the ‘modern age’.
Vaisnavism was thought to be outmoded, and the truths of the sacred Vedas were
obscured by rampant misinterpretation, speculation, and condemnation. In this
atmosphere, only a very few Vaiñëava devotees understood and properly practiced
the sublime tenets of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. For the most part, the spotless
transcendental pastimes Çré Krsna enjoys in the spiritual world with Çrématé
Rädhäräëé and the other gopés, as revealed in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, were
equated with the condemned licentious affairs of this world. As a result, the
pure Vaiñëavism taught by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu had largely been covered and
had fallen into disrepute throughout large sections of society.

Inspired by his spiritual master, Çréla Jagannätha däsa Bäbäjé, Çréla
Bhaktivinoda set out to revive the true teachings of Çré Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Helped by his fourth son, Bimala Prasäda, who would become the celebrated Çréla
Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura Prabhupäda, Çréla Bhaktivinoda started a
vigorous campaign of preaching Kåñëa consciousness. The undaunted efforts of
Çréla Bhaktivinoda knew no bounds, and great success followed his heroic
struggles and campaigns. Books, essays, magazines, poems, songs, and
commentaries flowed like the unstoppable Ganges from his pen. He founded many
preaching centres for the distribution of kåñëa-näma and most notably he
revealed the lost site of Çré Caitanya’s birth. In 1896, Çréla Bhaktivinoda
reached out to the Western world with the publication of Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu: His Life and Precepts. He sent this concise English work to various
universities and intellectuals, particularly in the West. In that same year,
Çréla Bhaktivinoda made a remarkable prediction. Long before the invention of
the aeroplane, he wrote, “A personality will soon appear in order to preach the
teachings of Çré Caitanya and move unrestrictedly over the whole world with His
message.” This year, 1896, was the birth year of Çréla A.C. Bhaktivedanta Svämé
Prabhupäda, who would fulfil the Öhäkura’s prophecy in his later years with the
founding of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. Earlier, in
1885, in his monthly Bengali publication Sajjana-toñaëi, Çréla Bhaktivinoda had
called for the day when the fortunate English, French, Russian, German, and
American people would take up hari-näma-saìkértana in their streets and join
with their Bengali brothers in diving into the ocean of Çré Caitanya’s love.
Furthermore, in the same publication, the Öhäkura called for the day when all
sects and religions of the world would flow like rivers into the ocean of
Vaiñëavism. This trio of predictions, which the world is presently seeing
fulfilled, displays the spiritual empowerment of the great personality known as
Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura. In recognition of his eminence, the learned Vaiñëava
community of the time designated the Öhäkura the ‘Seventh Gosvämé’, according
him a status equivalent to that of the Six Gosvämés, the direct disciples of Çré
Caitanya. Any student of his life and works can only agree.

In 1908, the Öhäkura left household life, embracing the sannyäsa äçrama with the
acceptance of bäbäjé-veña from Çréla Gaura Kiçora däsa Bäbäjé Mahäräja and would
soon accept a number of disciples. However, in 1910, in Bhakti Bhavan, near the
samädhi of Çréla Haridäsa Öhäkura on the seashore of Jagannätha Puré, the
Öhäkura entered deep spiritual trance in uninterrupted meditation upon the
transcendental lélä of Çré Çré Rädhä Kåñëa, largely oblivious to the external
world. On the 23rd of June 1914, precisely at noon, at this holy place, the
Öhäkura departed this world to enter the eternal pastimes of the Lord. This was
the same day that Gadädhara Paëòita, the incarnation of Çrématé Rädhäräëé in the
Païca-tattva, had returned to the Lord’s unmanifest lélä some four hundred and
fifty years before. His legacy, freely bestowed upon all souls of this world, is
an exemplary spiritual life and an ocean of transcendental literature. This
ocean comprises innumerable magazine articles and over one hundred publications
of songs, poetry, and philosophy.

A major wave in this ocean is the Jaiva-dharma, published in Bengali in that
momentous year of 1896. The book is set in Navadvépa-dhäma, Çré Caitanya’s
birthplace, approximately one hundred years after His birth. The work is in the
form of a highly entertaining novel, the central core of which is a series of
dialogues between spiritual teachers and their disciples. There are also a
number of debates on various topics between these teachers and antagonistic
parties. Within this format, Çréla Bhaktivinoda brilliantly elucidates the
philosophy, practice, and ultimate goal of transcendental life as taught by Çré
Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu.

The book has four distinct parts that progressively illuminate the various
levels of spiritual practice the fallen conditioned jéva must pursue to be
re-established in his eternal jaiva-dharma, transcendental love of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. Chapters One to Twelve form the first part,
which establishes the transcendental authenticity of jaiva-dharma as distinct
from all material activity. Chapter One clarifies the difference between pure
jaiva-dharma and mundane, materially motivated religiosity. Chapter Two
establishes jaiva-dharma as the pure and eternal function of the soul, as
opposed to the ever-changing flux of activities the fallen soul performs in the
illusion of material conditioning. Chapter Three expounds the prime necessity of
renouncing all illusory material designations in the search for the Absolute. In
particular, the relationship between varëäçrama-dharma and jaiva-dharma is
debated. Chapter Four establishes jaiva-dharma, vaiñëava-dharma, and
nitya-dharma, the eternal function of the soul, as synonymous when understood in
their purest essence. Chapter Five explains that vaidhé-bhakti, comprising the
preliminary devotional practices that lead to the attainment of one’s innate
jaiva-dharma, is a purely transcendental activity. In this regard, there are
friendly discussions between the descendants of the Chänd Kazi, a Muslim-born
devotee of Çré Caitanya, and the renounced Vaiñëavas. In Chapter Six, a brähmaëa
paëòita offended by the friendly dealings between the Vaiñëavas and the Käzé’s
descendants debates the validity of this behaviour. Jaiva-dharma is established
as open to all souls, without consideration of race and caste. Chapter Seven
fully elucidates the terrible cycle of birth and death in the material world and
how jaiva-dharma frees one from such suffering. In Chapter Eight, Vaiñëava
behaviour is explained to a young devotee. This chapter describes the various
levels of Vaiñëavas, and how one should relate toward the members of each level.
Chapter Nine contains an interesting debate between a Vaiñëava and a Çakta
worshiper that contrasts the goals of spiritual culture with those of material
advancement. Chapter Ten relates another debate, this time concerning the
historical status of the Vaiñëavism taught by Çré Caitanya. The conclusion is
that the philosophy and practices taught by Çré Caitanya are eternal. In Chapter
Eleven, a Muslim scholar challenges the Vaiñëavas over their practice of Deity
worship. A fascinating debate ensues. In Chapter Twelve, Vrajanätha, a sincere
aspirant to jaiva-dharma, enters the book. He is given preliminary guidance in
the principles of sädhana, regulated spiritual practice, and sädhya, the
ultimate goal of such practice. 

We now enter the second part of the book, Chapters Thirteen through Twenty-two.
Jaiva-dharma in connection with material topics has been illustrated, so Çréla
Bhaktivinoda moves us, the enthralled readers, on to an elaborate exposition of
the Daçä-mula-tattva, the ten fundamental principles of the philosophy taught by
Çré Caitanya. Chapter Thirteen enumerates these ten principles, which are
divided into two categories: pramäëa, proof, and prameya, that which is to be
proved. This chapter also expounds on the first two of the ten principles. The
first is pramäëa; the sacred Vedas are established as the ultimate authority in
the description of Absolute Truth and thus as the ultimate pramäëa, proof. The
second principle establishes Çré Hari—Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead—as the highest manifestation of the Absolute Truth. Chapter Fourteen
presents the third and fourth principles. The third principle portrays the
inconceivable potencies of Çré Kåñëa, and the fourth illustrates Çré Kåñëa as
the shelter of all rasa, transcendental mellow. Chapter Fifteen begins a trio of
chapters discussing jéva-tattva, the truth concerning the jévas, the innumerable
individual spirit souls. Chapter Fifteen begins the discussion with an elaborate
exposition of the intrinsic nature of the jéva. Chapter Sixteen describes the
enslavement of the errant jéva by the mäyä-sakti, the external, illusory
material energy. Chapter Seventeen gives us hope by describing the liberation of
the jéva from the mäyä-sakti and his establishment under the shelter of the
cit-sakti, the internal, spiritual energy. Chapter Eighteen gives the ultimate
description of reality: acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva, Çré Kåñëa’s inconceivable and
simultaneous difference from and oneness with every aspect of His creation.
Chapter Nineteen moves us on from sambandha-tattva, the philosophical tenets of
bhakti, to a trio of chapters dealing with abhidheya-tattva, the means for
attaining the highest goal. Chapter Nineteen begins the trio by presenting
unmotivated bhakti, uncontaminated by karma (fruitive desire) or jïäna
(empirical mental speculation) as the abhidheya, means of attainment. Chapter
Twenty elaborately elucidates the beginning stage of abhidheya:
vaidhé-sädhana-bhakti, regulated devotional practices impelled by chaste
adherence to scriptural injunctions "scriptural stipulations" sounds horrible.
Chapter Twenty-one takes us to the next stage of abhidheya with a wonderfully
informative presentation of rägänuga-sädhana-bhakti, devotional practice
following in the footsteps of the residents of the transcendental realm and
impelled by an awakening spiritual greed. Chapter Twenty-two presents the final
and tenth principle of the daçä-müla-tattva, known as prayojana-tattva, the
highest goal of attainment, which is kåñëa-prema, transcendental love of Çré
Kåñëa.

Now begins the third section of Jaiva-dharma, comprising three chapters, which
presents çré-näma-tattva, the principle of harinäma, the transcendental names of
Çré Kåñëa. Chapter Twenty-three begins with a panoramic presentation of the
philosophical truths concerning harinäma. Chapter Twenty-four discusses
nämäparädha, offensive chanting, and Chapter Twenty-five discusses nämäbhäsa,
the stage of clearing offences to harinäma.

As the spiritual aspirant progressively frees his chanting of harinäma from
offences, the mercy of Çré Kåñëa enables him to progressively experience rasa,
transcendental mellow. Thus, we are led to the fourth and final section of
Jaiva-dharma, which deals with rasa-tattva, the principles of transcendental
mellow. Chapter Twenty-six begins with a general introduction to rasa-tattva.
Chapter Twenty-seven deals with sämagré-bhäva, the ingredients of rasa, and the
intermixing of these ingredients. Chapter Twenty-eight explains the central
cause of experiencing rasa, known as mukhya-rati, the attachment of the devotee
to Çré Kåñëa. This attachment takes the form of various moods towards Çré Kåñëa.
Chapter Twenty-nine presents the moods of çänta-rati, attachment in neutrality,
däsya-rati, attachment in servitude, and sakhya-rati, attachment in fraternity.
Chapter Thirty discusses vätsalya-rati, attachment in parenthood, and
mädhurya-rati, attachment in conjugal love. Chapters Thirty-one to Thirty-seven
expound the topic of mädhurya-rati with detailed descriptions of the constituent
personalities, moods, and activities. The perfection of mädhurya-rati is known
as çåìgära-rasa, which has two divisions: vipralambha, love in separation, and
sambhoga, love in union. Chapter Thirty-eight introduces çåìgära-rasa, the
perfected mellow of conjugality, and describes vipralambha in detail. Chapter
Thirty-nine elucidates sambhoga with particular reference to the
añöa-käléya-lélä, the eightfold daily pastimes that Çré Kåñëa and His dear
devotees enjoy in the spiritual world. In Chapter Thirty-nine, the topic is how
the sincere aspirant can actually enter the transcendental lélä of Çré Kåñëa by
undertaking the esoteric practice of ekädaça-bhäva, the assumption of the eleven
items of spiritual identity. Also, the end of this chapter details the
particular missions Çré Caitanya gave His most prominent disciples. The final
chapter, Chapter Forty, scientifically explains the progressive stages on the
path of attaining the final goal of life, kåñëa-prema, and the concomitant
practices of each level. The book then ends with a final prayer and the
phala-çruti, a description of the fruit one attains by studying this wonderful
book, Jaiva-dharma.

At this point, the learned reader will appreciate how comprehensively Çréla
Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura has presented the philosophy, practice, and goal of
Vaiñëavism as taught by his Lord, Çré Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Though the book
displays the profound genius of Çréla Bhaktivinoda, prema, transcendental love,
is the wonderfully predominant mood. The sincere reader cannot help but imbibe
such sublime nectar from the pages of Jaiva-dharma. Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura
completed the book in 1896 on the appearance day of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu;
undoubtedly, it is a further avatära of Çré Caitanya, the literary incarnation
of His teachings. 

May our lives be an attempt to repay the infinite debt we owe the great
Vaiñëava, Çréla Sac-cid-änanda Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura, for his sublime elucidation
of jaiva-dharma.

Falling at the lotus feet of Çréla Bhaktivinoda and all the Vaiñëavas, I pray to
become their eternal servant, Keçédamana däsa 

JDH 1: Nitya-dharma, The Eternal Nature of the Living Entity, and
Naimittika-dharma, His Impermanent Religious Duties 

Chapter One
Nitya-dharma, The Eternal Nature of the Living Entity, and Naimittika-dharma,
His Impermanent Religious Duties 

Jambüdvépa, the earth planet, is the most precious planet in the solar system,
and Bhärata-varña, India, is the most auspicious land upon earth. Gaura-maëòala,
Bengal, is spiritually the pre-eminent province of India, and Çré
Navadvépa-dhäma is the crown jewel of Bengal. Shining eternally in spiritual
splendour, the region of Godruma prospers in one corner of Çré Navadvépa-dhäma,
upon the banks of the Bhägérathé Gaìgä.

In days past, the woody bowers of Godruma provided places of spiritual retreat
to many elevated and saintly souls. Pradyumna-kuïja, a simple meditation
cottage, was located in the very same arbour where Çré Surabhidevé had long ago
meditated, worshiping Çré Gauräìga-sundara within her heart. The present
occupant of this cottage, Çré Premadäsa Paramahaàsa Bäbäjé, was receiving
spiritual instructions from Çré Pradyumna Brahmacäré, a bhägavata-päriñada, an
eternal associate of the Supreme Lord, and was thus known as his çikñä-çiñya, a
disciple who receives instruction, but not mantra initiation. 

Çré Premadäsa Paramahaàsa Bäbäjé was an erudite scholar, having mastered all the
branches of philosophy and the various scriptures. He passed his days in
continuously chanting harinäma, the holy names, in ecstasy. Bäbäjé Mahäräja had
chosen Godruma as his place of meditation with the knowledge that it is,
according to spiritual criteria, an exact replica of Nandagräma in Vraja. His
daily routine comprised chanting a minimum of two hundred thousand names of
Kåñëa and humbly offering innumerable prostrate obeisances to all Vaiñëavas. He
sustained himself by mädhukaré, thus begging a little foodstuff at the homes of
various cowherds until he had enough for the day, just as a bee takes a small
amount of pollen from many flowers. 

After these daily chores, Çré Premadäsa Paramahaàsa Bäbäjé never wasted the
remaining time in village prattle; daily, he would read aloud the Prema-vivarta,
by Çréla Jagadänanda Paëòita, an eternal associate of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu,
his eyes brimming with tears of exultation. On these occasions, the saintly
devotees from the neighbouring cottages eagerly gathered around Çré Premadäsa
Paramahaàsa Bäbäjé to listen. Hardly surprising, for the text of Prema-vivarta
is saturated with rasa, spiritual mellow, and the sweet flow of Bäbäjé
Mahäräja’s voice was so inspiring that it would douse any flames of material
misery within the hearts of the entranced devotees. 

One afternoon, after completing his prescribed number of rounds of chanting
harinäma, Bäbäjé Mahäräja was seated in a small clearing in the wooded bower
named Çré Mädhavé-mälaté. Upon reciting the Prema-vivarta, he soon felt
spiritual emotions stir within his heart. 

At that moment, a person of the renounced order, a sannyäsé, approached him and
fell flat before him in utter humility, remaining prostrate for a considerable
length of time. Already deep in meditation, Bäbäjé Mahäräja was at first unaware
of the sannyäsé’s presence. However, soon coming out of his meditation and
seeing the sannyäsé offering obeisances, Bäbäjé Mahäräja felt overcome with
modesty, for he considered himself lower than the straw in the street. So Bäbäjé
Mahäräja also fell down upon his hands and knees in front of the sannyäsé,
crying out, “O my Çré Caitanya! O Nityänanda! Kindly be merciful to this fallen
wretch!” Then, turning to the sannyäsé, he addressed him, “Sir, I am very low
and without means—why do you embarrass me so?” After touching the feet of Bäbäjé
Mahäräja in awed respect, the sannyäsé stood up. Bäbäjé Mahäräja was quick to
offer his guest a straw mat, upon which he sat in the assembly of Vaiñëavas. 

Bäbäjé Mahäräja began to speak with a faltering voice, choked with devotional
sentiments, “Dear sir, how may this fallen soul be of any service to you?” 

The sannyäsé put down his kamaëòalu, water pot, and addressed Bäbäjé Mahäräja
with folded hands, “Respected master, I am a very unfortunate soul! Whilst
residing in holy places of pilgrimage like Väräëasé, I have thoroughly studied
the six branches of philosophy—Nyäya, Vaiçeñika, Säìkhya, Pataïjali,
Uttara-mémäàsä, and Vedänta—all of which are related to the Vedas, Brahma-sütra,
and Upaniñads. I have thus spent a good number of years in serious debate and
contemplation upon the different conclusions of the scriptures. Twelve years
ago, I accepted initiation into the sannyäsa order from Çréla Saccidänanda
Sarasvaté. After my initiation, I travelled widely to all places of pilgrimage,
always associating with other sannyäsés in the line of Çré Çaìkaräcärya. I
passed through the first three levels of the renounced order, namely küöécaka,
bahüòaka, and haàsa, and some time ago, I attained the final stage of sannyäsa,
the paramahaàsa level. In Väräëasé, I accepted the vow of silence and
contemplated deeply the teachings of Çré Çaìkaräcärya, who had compressed the
essence of his philosophy into a number of statements from the Vedas such as
ahaà brahmäsmi, ‘I am Brahman’; prajïänaà brahmä, ‘Brahman is consciousness’;
and tat tvam asi, ‘You are that,’ calling them the mahä-väkyas, great sayings of
the Vedas.

“One day, when I was meditating, a Vaiñëava saint passed by, loudly singing the
glorious pastimes of Çré Hari. I opened my eyes and saw the hairs on his body
standing on end and tears cascading down his cheeks, soaking him. Rapturously he
sang, ‘Çré Kåñëa Caitanya, Prabhu Nityänanda!’ He danced with faltering steps,
sometimes tripping and falling to the ground. 

“The sight of him and the sound of his song stirred up such unknown emotions in
me that I find it impossible to fully describe this experience to you. Certain
deep feelings were touched within me. Nevertheless, desiring to maintain my
position of respect as a paramahaàsa, I did not attempt to meet him. What a
shame! Fie on my position of respect! A curse upon my luck! From that time on,
however, for some strange reason my mind has become attracted to the lotus feet
of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. 

“Later, I anxiously searched for that Vaiñëava saint, but without success. I
clearly perceived that by seeing this Vaiñëava saint and hearing his chanting of
Kåñëa’s name I had experienced a pure joy that I had never felt before—an
intense bliss I had never believed possible for a human being. After pondering
upon this subject for a few days, I finally concluded that the best thing for me
was to take shelter at the feet of a Vaiñëava. Therefore, I left Väräëasé and
went to Våndävana-dhäma. 

“There I saw many Vaiñëavas repeating the names of Çré Rüpa, Çré Sanätana and
Çré Jéva Gosvämé with deep feelings of separation and sorrow, absorbed in
meditation upon the pastimes of Çré Çré Rädhä Kåñëa. They also spoke of Çré
Navadvépa-dhäma, going immediately into ecstasy, falling down to roll in the
dust. My desire to see Navadvépa increased greatly and after first
circumambulating the area of Vraja-dhäma, I started for Navadvépa. A few days
ago, I arrived here in Mäyäpura, and hearing your praises I have come to find
shelter at your feet. Kindly bestow your mercy upon me and accept me as your
servant, making my life worthwhile and complete.”

Bäbäjé Mahäräja, exhibiting great humility, took a straw between his teeth and
then spoke with a quavering voice, “My dear sir of the renounced order, I am a
useless soul. I have spoiled my life, in trying only to fill my belly, get
enough sleep, and in talk about trivialities. I have taken shelter of this land,
where Çré Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu has performed His many pastimes and now
somehow or other I am passing my days. Unfortunately, I cannot perceive the true
nature of spiritual love of Godhead, kåñëa-prema. You are truly fortunate! You
were blessed by seeing a real Vaiñëava and this meeting granted you, if only for
a moment, the divine relish of kåñëa-prema. Indeed, you are a recipient of the
special mercy of Çré Kåñëa Caitanya. I will remain ever grateful if, in the
moments of your ecstatic kåñëa-prema, you can remember a fallen wretch like me
with fondness.” 

Bäbäjé Mahäräja went over to the sannyäsé, warmly embraced him and showered him
with the tears of joy streaming from his eyes. The Sannyäsé Thäkura immediately
experienced spiritual exultation through the touch of a pure Vaiñëava and began
to cry and dance. While dancing, he sang this refrain:

jaya çré-kåñëa caitanya çré prabhu nityänanda
jaya çré-premadäsa guru, jaya bhajana änanda

“All glories to Çré Kåñëa Caitanya and Çré Nityänanda Prabhu! All glories to my
spiritual master, Çré Premadäsa Bäbäjé! And all glories to the bliss devotional
worship!”

Composing himself after singing and dancing for a long while, Sannyäsé Öhäkura
sat down and started to converse with Bäbäjé Mahäräja. Bäbäjé Mahäräja said with
humility, “O great sage, please spend a few days here in Pradyumna Kuïja and
purify me by your association.” 

Sannyäsé Öhäkura replied, “I surrender my body and life to you. Why only a few
days? I pray that I may spend the rest of my life here in your service.” Being
well versed in all the scriptures, Sannyäsé Öhäkura knew well that one should
stay in the äçrama of one’s guru, known as the gurukula, and there receive
spiritual instruction. Thus, he resolved to stay on in Pradyumna Kuïja. 

One day, Bäbäjé Mahäräja addressed Sannyäsé Öhäkura, “O great one! Çré Pradyumna
Brahmacäré Öhäkura, my spiritual master, has shown great compassion towards me
and granted me sanctuary at his feet. Presently, he resides in a remote section
of Navadvépa, in the village of Çré Devapallé, intensely absorbed in worshiping
Çré Nåsiàha-deva. Let us visit him today after we have completed mädhukaré.”

That afternoon, they crossed the Gaìgä and arrived in Çré Devapallé. As they
came down the Süryaöélä mound, they saw Çré Pradyumna Brahmacäré inside the Çré
Nåsiàha-deva temple. While still at a distance, Bäbäjé Mahäräja offered
obeisances to his guru, prostrating himself fully upon the ground. Moved by
tender affection, Çré Pradyumna Brahmacäré Öhäkura came out of the temple and,
lifting Bäbäjé Mahäräja up with both hands, lovingly embraced him and inquired
about his well-being. They then sat down and discussed spiritual topics at
length. Finally, Bäbäjé Mahäräja turned to Sannyäsé Öhäkura and introduced him
in detail to Pradyumna Brahmacari Öhäkura, who then addressed him
affectionately, “My dear son! You have found the proper spiritual master. Now
try to sincerely study the Prema-vivarta from the able Paramahaàsa Premadäsa
Bäbäjé, as is stated in the Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya-lélä 8.128:

kibä vipra, kibä nyäsé, çüdra kene naya
yei kåñëa-tattva-vettä, sei ‘guru’ haya

“Whether one is a brähmaëa, sannyäsé, or çüdra—regardless of what one is—one can
become a spiritual master, if one knows the science of Kåñëa.”

Following the example of his guru, Sannyäsé Öhäkura offered prostrate obeisances
to Çré Pradyumna Brahmacäré Öhäkura, whom he now saw as his grand spiritual
master, parama-guru. He humbly replied, “Dear master! You are a päriñada, an
eternal associate, of Çré Caitanya. Your compassionate glance can purify many
thousands of sannyäsés like me, so I beg for your kindness.” 

Having previously never learnt the rules of Vaiñëava etiquette, Sannyäsé Öhäkura
keenly observed the ensuing dealings between his guru and parama-guru. Realizing
that this was the standard of behaviour, he resolved to emulate it unreservedly.
Bäbäjé Mahäräja and Sannyäsé Öhäkura stayed for the sandhyä-ärati, evening
worship, and afterwards returned to Godruma.

The days passed quickly and Sannyäsé Öhäkura developed the desire to ask Bäbäjé
Mahäräja certain philosophical questions. Except for the adoption of the
Vaiñëava attire, Sannyäsé Öhäkura had all the distinguishing features of a
devotee. From his previous training, he had already developed the qualities of
sama, equanimity; dama, sense control; and brahma-niñöhä, unwavering
establishment in the all-pervading, non-dual, Absolute Truth. Now, moreover, he
was developing realization of the divine pastimes of the parama-brahma, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çri Kåñëa, and so, concomitantly, he was
gradually developing true humility and meekness.

One day at sunrise, Bäbäjé Mahäräja, his morning bath completed, sat in the
calmness of the Çré Mädhavé-mälaté Maëòapa grove and began to chant harinäma
upon his mälä, chanting beads, made from the tulasé tree. Awareness of his body
and the surrounding phenomenal world faded away. He was soon deep in meditation
upon the niçänta-lélä, the dawn pastimes of Goloka Våndävana—in particular those
amorous exchanges of the Divine Couple, Rädhä-Kåñëa, in the love groves of
Våndävana, which would be ending soon with the coming of daylight, forcing Their
separation and return to Their respective homes. Incessant tears streamed down
his cheeks and, becoming transfixed in his siddha-deha, perfected spiritual
form, he executed in meditation the devotional duties assigned to him in the
dawn pastimes of the Divine Couple in Their transcendental abode.

Sannyäsé Öhäkura, watching at first from a polite distance, gradually came
nearer and with awestruck wonder began observing closely the ecstatic symptoms
now exhibited upon Bäbäjé Mahäräja’s body. Still deep in meditation, Bäbäjé
Mahäräja called out, “O sakhé! Quickly quieten that hag of a monkey, Kakkhaté!
She will disturb the blissful sleep of our most dear Rädhäräëé and Govinda. If
They awaken, Lalitä-sakhé will be most upset and surely chastise me. Look over
there! Anaìga-maïjaré is signalling that we must do this! You are
Ramaëa-maïjaré, and having been given this duty, you should execute it
conscientiously.” After speaking these words, Bäbäjé Mahäräja fell down in an
ecstatic swoon. Realizing that the words were addressed to him, Sannyäsé Öhäkura
understood, at that moment, both his siddha-deha, spiritual form and identity,
and his specific devotional service. Thus, he began to ready himself for these
new devotional assignments.

Dawn was spreading across the eastern horizon. The sun was peeping out, aglow
with the radiance of morning, which was enveloping the beautiful bowers of the
Çré Mädhavé-mälaté Maëòapa of Pradyumna-kuïja in its fiery aura. Birds chirped
in greeting, and a light breeze carried their songs in every direction. In the
early sunlight, Nature blushed with pristine beauty. 

Bäbäjé Mahäräja, sitting upon a straw mat, showed signs of slowly coming back to
external consciousness. He then began to chant quietly upon his mälä. Taking
this opportunity, Sannyäsé Öhäkura sat near Bäbäjé Mahäräja and addressed him,
“Dear master! Your poor servitor would like to ask a question. Kindly soothe his
raging mind with your answer. Let your words infuse the divine sentiments of
Vraja within his heart, which is terribly seared by the flames of monism and
impersonal Brahman realization.”

Bäbäjé Mahäräja, “As you are a most fit candidate, I will try my best to answer
any question you have.”

Sannyäsé Öhäkura, “Dear master! Wherever I have been, I have heard paëòitas
expound the importance of dharma, religious duty, and, in response, I have
always enquired what dharma actually is in truth. However, the sad fact is that
all the answers I have received are varied and contradictory. Therefore, now,
from you, I would like to know—what is the true dharma of mankind? Why does each
of the different religious teachers preach his particular version of dharma as
being the only true religion? If there actually is but one dharma, then why are
the numerous religious leaders not in agreement, and following that singular
spiritual path?”

Bäbäjé Mahäräja quietly began his dissertation while worshiping the lotus feet
of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu within his mind, “O fortunate one! Listen attentively
as I explain to you man’s true religion, his nitya-dharma. The natural
characteristics of a vastu, eternal entity or substance, are related to its
ghaöana, intrinsic constitution. By the mercy of Çré Kåñëa, a vastu, once
brought into existence, inherently possesses a permanent nature—known as its
dharma. Thus, the innate nature is the nitya-dharma, the eternal occupational
activity, of the vastu, entity. 

“However, by force of circumstance, or by contact with other substances, the
original character of the vastu may apparently be transformed and changed. In
the course of time, when this transformed character becomes stable, it then
appears to be a seemingly permanent quality of the vastu—apparently being the
genuine original, eternal and immanent nature. Nevertheless, this new distorted
character is not the svabhäva, inherent nature. Actually, this new character is
defined as nisarga, a condition that only appears to be natural. Appearing to be
eternal, the nisarga deceptively usurps the actual svabhäva of the vastu,
entity. 

“Let us take, for example, the substance water. Liquidity is its inherent
nature. However, when water freezes to ice, solidity becomes its assumed
nature—its nisarga. Nisarga is a temporary condition because it is brought about
by an agent acting as a catalyst. When the agent is removed, the false temporary
nisarga also disappears; whereas, conversely, the true inherent nature is
maintained eternally. Even if the vastu apparently transforms, the nitya-dharma
remains its intrinsic nature, latent within the seemingly changed vastu, and by
the amelioration of the alien circumstances the nitya-dharma will, in time,
surely reassert itself.

“The inherent nature, svabhäva, is the eternal religion of a vastu—the
nitya-dharma. In contrast, the assumed nature of a vastu—the nisarga—is its
naimittika-dharma, temporary nature. One who possesses vastu-jïäna, knowledge of
the Absolute Reality, is able to discriminate between nitya-dharma and
naimittika-dharma, temporary, material, religious performance. However, without
this knowledge, a person will falsely consider the temporary nisarga and
resultant naimittika-dharma to be the nitya-dharma. 

Sannyäsé Öhäkura then asked, “Kindly further elucidate the definitions of vastu
and svabhäva?”

Bäbäjé Mahäräja answered, “The Sanskrit word vastu is a derivative of the root
vas—which means ‘to exist’ or ‘to dwell’—conjugated and made into a noun by the
suffix tu. Therefore, vastu means ‘that which exists being self-evident and
perceivable.’ Vastu is of two kinds: västava-vastu and avästava-vastu.
Västava-vastu is transcendental truth—eternal spiritual substance.
Avästava-vastu is matter—temporary objects possessing inert qualities, having
but an illusory semblance of the actual eternal reality. The existence of
västava-vastu is absolute, transcendental reality wherein the manifested
attributes are a display of the actual intrinsic nature—the nitya-dharma. The
jéva is an element of transcendental västava-vastu; and the jéva’s intrinsic
nature is his nitya-dharma, permanent, inherent characteristic. 

“It is a matter of perception. Perception of the intrinsic dharma is at times
accurate and, at other times, illusory. The statement of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
1.1.2: …vedyaà västavam atra vastu çivädam… ‘The highest truth is reality
distinguished from illusion for the benefit of all,’ assures us that
västava-vastu decisively denotes spiritual, transcendental truth. Ultimately,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead alone is that västava-vastu, truly abiding
substance. The jéva is a fractional part of that västava-vastu and mäyä—the
external potency that produces illusion—is His energy. Therefore, vastu
indicates the Supreme Lord, the jéva, and mäyä—all three principles together.
Proper comprehension of the relationships amongst these principles is
çuddha-jïäna, true knowledge. 

“There are various conceptions about these three principles, but almost all of
them are illusory and mundane. For instance, in the Vaiçeñika school of thought,
the argumentation and classification of dravya, objects, and guëa, qualities,
are based entirely upon their avästava-vastu, temporary nature.” 

Sannyäsé Öhäkura continued, “Master, I would like to have a better grasp of this
subject.”

Bäbäjé Mahäräja answered, “Çréla Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja is a most elevated saint who
has received the direct mercy of Çré Nityänanda. He once showed me a handwritten
manuscript, entitled, Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, which contains the deliberations
of Çré Caitanya upon this topic. In the Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya-lélä,
Chapter 20, verses 108 and 117, there is the following statement:

jévera ‘svarüpa’ haya—kåñëera ‘nitya-däsa’
kåñëera ‘taöasthä-çakti’ ‘bhedäbheda-prakäça 

‘‘‘The nitya-dharma of the jéva is to be an eternal servant of Kåñëa because he
is the taöasthä-çakti, marginal energy, of Kåñëa and thus a manifestation
simultaneously one with and different from the Lord.’ 

kåñëa bhuli’ sei jéva anädi-bahirmukha
ataeva mäyä täre deya saàsära-duùkha

“‘Forgetting Kåñëa, the jéva has been attracted by the external feature from
time immemorial. Therefore, mäyä, the illusory energy, gives him all kinds of
misery in his material existence.’

“Çré Kåñëa is the cit-vastu, wholly and absolutely spiritual entity. When
describing Him, many persons use the analogy of the sun: He is the only sun of
the spiritual world and the jévas are the innumerable particles of His rays. It
would be an inaccurate parallel to compare the jéva, an infinitesimal part of
Çré Kåñëa, to a rock—a minute part of a gigantic mountain—since the countless
millions of jévas who emanate from Çré Kåñëa, do not in any way affect or
diminish the absolute wholeness of the Lord. Therefore, the Vedas compare the
Supreme Lord to a fire, and the jévas to its tiny sparks.

“Actually, no comparison is truly appropriate. Whether the jéva is described as
a tiny spark of a fire, a minute particle of a sunray, or a speck of gold from a
gold mine, none of these comparisons is actually perfect. Nevertheless, if one
can overlook the mundane imperfections in these analogies, then the actual truth
about the jéva will easily crystallize: Çré Kåñëa is the infinite spiritual
substance, while the jéva is His infinitesimal part and parcel and therefore
also a spiritual substance. Çré Kåñëa and the jéva are qualitatively the same,
being of the same spiritual nature. 

“However, the Supreme Lord is båhat-cit-vastu, the complete, infinite, spiritual
entity; whereas, the jéva is anu-cit-vastu, the infinitesimal spiritual entity,
the Lord’s part and parcel. Although they are one in the quality of their
spiritual nature and consciousness, this contrast of quantity between the Lord
and the jéva is a permanent feature of their natures. Therefore, Çré Kåñëa is
the jéva’s eternal master and the jéva is Çré Kåñëa’s eternal servant. This is
their natural constitutional relationship. Kåñëa is the supreme ruler and
observer; the jéva is the ruled and observed. Kåñëa is independently
omnipotent—the Supreme Controller—and the jéva’s potency is dependent and
controlled. Kåñëa is the complete whole; the jéva is a minutely tiny part. With
His infinitely superior opulence, Çré Kåñëa is the all-attractive person, who
thereby attracts all the jévas to Himself. Thus, it is natural for the jéva to
be in kåñëa-däsya, eternal subservience to Kåñëa, and this is the jéva’s
sva-bhäva, intrinsic nature, his dharma.

“Çré Kåñëa is the possessor of unlimited energies. For instance, to manifest the
spiritual world the Lord displays His pürëa-çakti, full-blown internal potency,
the antaraìga-çakti. Similarly, to create the jévas and to carry out the other
tasks involved in the organization of this imperfect material cosmos, He employs
another of His energies, the taöasthä-çakti, the marginal energy. By nature, the
material and spiritual energies are diametrically opposed and are therefore
incompatible. The taöasthä çakti, however, creates an entity that can interact
with both the material and the spiritual natures.

“The taöa-rekhä, the marginal line lying between the water of a river and its
bank, is both water and land, being situated where the two meet. Since, in this
case, the divine taöasthä-çakti is situated at the margin of matter and spirit,
it displays the characteristics of both matter and spirit—it is one principle,
yet it displays two natures. The jéva is a spiritual spark, a product of the
higher spiritual nature, yet, being the divine taöasthä-çakti, he has a nature
that enables him to relate to the mundane material energy and be always prone to
coming under her influence. Thus, on one hand, the jéva cannot be wholly likened
to the pure spiritual nature, which is transcendental to and entirely beyond the
influence of the material nature. Nevertheless, on the other hand, the jéva
cannot be categorized as material since, by his intrinsic constitution, he is
spiritual. Therefore, being an entity with innate characteristics different from
both matter and pure spirit, the jéva receives a separate designation as the
jéva-tattva, the jéva principle. In this respect, one must accept the eternal
distinction between the Supreme Lord and the jéva. 

“Bhagavän, the Supreme Lord, is the master and controller of mäyä, who is fully
subservient to His will. In contrast, the jéva is prone to come under the
influence of mäyä; at any time, the jéva may be forced to submit to the dictates
of mäyä. Therefore, all these three principles—éçvara (the Supreme Lord), jéva,
and mäyä—are mutually distinct eternal realities. 

“Amongst them, the Supreme Lord is described in the Çré Kaöhopaniñad, 2.2.13,
as:

nityo nityänäm cetanaç cetanänäm 

“‘The Supreme Lord is the one supreme eternal entity amongst all eternal
entities, and the fundamental conscious being amongst all conscious beings.’

“Thus, Çré Kåñëa is declared the ultimate eternal cause of all three
entities—éçvara, jéva, and mäyä. Constitutionally, the jéva is the eternal
servant of Kåñëa and the direct manifestation of His taöasthä-çakti. From this
analysis, we can conclude that the jéva is the bhedäbheda prakäça manifestation
of Bhagavän, simultaneously one with and different from the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. The jéva may be subject to the domination of mäyä, while
the Supreme Lord is eternally the controller of mäyä—herein dwells an eternal
difference between the jéva and Çré Kåñëa. The jéva is one of the Supreme Lord’s
divine energies; thus, the jéva’s constitutional nature is spiritual, just as
the Supreme Godhead is intrinsically spiritual. In this respect, the jéva and
the Supreme Lord are non-different. However, the jéva and the Supreme Lord are
simultaneously non-different and different, and the concept of eternal
difference may be seen to predominate.

“Servitorship to Çré Kåñëa is the nitya-dharma of the jéva, and when the jéva,
somehow or other, turns away from Kåñëa, this change of attitude is tantamount
to rejection of the Lord and His service. From the point of this occurrence, the
jéva is subject to the domination of mäyä because of his neglectful ignorance
and consequent forgetfulness of the Supreme Lord. Furthermore, upon thus
entering the material world, the jéva brings with him no historical record of
this fall as this fall originates outside the purview of material time, thus
justifying the use of the phrase anädi-bahirmukha, beginninglessly—in terms of
material time—turned away from the spiritual realm.

“Serving Kåñëa is the nitya-dharma, of the jéva, and the instant the jéva
neglects and forgets this truth his eternal nature becomes perverted and
progressively enslaved by mäyä. In contact with mäyä, he develops a mundane
nature, nisarga, paving the way for naimittika-dharma, impermanent religious
duties dictated by material contact. Nitya-dharma, the eternal religious
activity born from the inherent nature of the jéva, is complete and pure in
itself—it is constant and flawless. Naimittika-dharma, on the contrary, appears
in many diverse forms under the varying material circumstances and when
expounded upon by the less-enlightened men of conflicting opinions.” 

Abruptly, Bäbäjé Mahäräja fell silent and began to chant upon his beads.
Sannyäsé Öhäkura, who had been listening keenly throughout the discussion, now
offered his prostrate obeisances to Bäbäjé Mahäräja, saying, “Master, today I
will meditate on your esoteric teachings. Tomorrow I will return with whatever
queries I may have and present them at your lotus feet.”

Thus ends the first chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma, The Eternal
Nature of the Living Entity, and Naimittika-dharma, His Impermanent Religious
Duties.

JDH 2: The Nitya-dharma of the Living Entity Is Pure and Everlasting

Chapter Two
The Nitya-dharma of the Living Entity Is Pure and Everlasting

The next morning, Sannyäsé Öhäkura found Çré Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé
Mahäräja internally absorbed in relishing the spiritual mellows of Vraja
Våndävana, so Sannyäsé Öhäkura did not approach him with his queries. Later that
afternoon, having finished their meal of begged food, the master and disciple
were sitting in the shady bowers of Çré Mädhavé-mälaté Maëòapa. In his benign
manner, Bäbäjé Mahäräja addressed Öhäkura, “O best of devotees! What is your
conclusion after hearing our deliberation upon dharma, natural function?”

Sannyäsé Öhäkura was instantly joyful and immediately enquired, “Dear master! If
the jéva, as you have said, is infinitesimal, then how can his dharma be
absolute, complete and pure? Secondly, if the dharma of the jéva is created
simultaneously with formation of his minute constitution, then how can that
dharma be considered ever-existent and eternal?”

Bäbäjé Mahäräja listened silently to the two questions, meditating upon the
lotus feet of Çré Kåñëa Caitanya. Then, with a gentle smile on his lips, he
began to speak, “Dear sir, even though the jéva is infinitesimal, his dharma is
certainly absolute, complete and pure, and also surely ever-existent and
eternal. Tiny stature is the innate characteristic of the jéva, but only has
reference to his size and not his function. The only båhad-vastu, infinite
entity, is the Supreme Brahman, Çré Kåñëa, of whom the countless jévas are
minute parts. Just as tiny sparks burst from a big, undivided fire, the jévas
emanate from the indivisible, Absolute Lord, Çré Kåñëa, the supreme conscious
being. In addition, just as each spark possesses the fiery attributes of the big
fire, so every jéva can manifest the absolute excellences of the Supreme
Brahman. A single spark in contact with a flammable object can ignite a raging
conflagration capable of consuming the entire world. Similarly, a jéva who
attains the ultimate objective—kåñëa-prema, divine love of Çré Kåñëa—can
inundate the entire universe with kåñëa-prema! However, as long as the
infinitesimal jéva is out of touch with the true objective of his original
spiritual nature, Çré Kåñëa—and thereby his true dharma—he appears debilitated.

“The truth is that nitya-dharma comes to light only by contact with its ultimate
source, Çré Kåñëa. Try to thoroughly research and understand the truth about the
nitya-dharma of the jéva. The jéva is constituted of transcendental, spiritual
consciousness and kåñëa-prema is his intrinsic attribute and thus his
nitya-dharma. Kåñëa-prema is non-material, being of transcendental substance,
and the purest manifestation of kåñëa-prema is unalloyed servitorship to Kåñëa.
Therefore, the constant and constitutional nitya-dharma of the jéva is rendering
loving devotional service to Çré Kåñëa. 

“The jéva experiences two conditions—çuddhävasthä, the state of pure
consciousness, and baddhävasthä, the state of conditioned, material
consciousness, which is to be imprisoned by mäyä. In çuddhavasthä the jéva is
wholly spiritual and thus free from all material attachments and contact.
Nevertheless, even in his pure state, the jéva remains infinitesimal, and this
minute stature makes it possible for him to change his station. 

“By contrast, the infinite and absolute Supreme Person, Çré Kåñëa, by His very
nature never changes His divine position. Indeed, by constitution, Kåñëa is
always infinite, complete, pure and eternal; whereas, the jéva by constitution
is infinitesimal, partial, susceptible to material contamination, and thus
subject to change. Yet, the inherent dharma of the jéva is the same as that of
the Supreme, namely infinite, complete, pure, and eternal. If the jéva remains
uncontaminated, he can maintain and perfectly manifest his intrinsic qualities
and original nature. However, when he conjoins with the illusory energy, mäyä,
his true constitutional nature is distorted, contaminated and eclipsed. In this
pathetic position, he has to suffer the wrath of the dualities of material
nature, happiness and distress. The jéva is thus entangled in material life as
soon as he forgets his position as a servant of Kåñëa.

“As long as the jéva remains pure, he can take pride in his inherent
self-conception as an eternal servant of Çré Kåñëa. If, however, through contact
with mäyä, this sense of spiritual egotism is contaminated and thus recedes, the
egotism of the jéva then takes on many different false manifestations. Now in
contact with mäyä, his original spiritual identity and function is shrouded by a
sthüla-çaréra, gross body, and a liëga-çaréra, subtle body. Through this contact
with mäyä, a new material egoism arises in the liëga-çaréra, which then
amalgamates with the sthüla-çaréra, thus generating a third variety of egoism.
The jéva in his pure state possesses a primal identity: servant of Kåñëa.
Nevertheless, in his fallen subtle-body state, the jéva egotistically claims to
be the enjoyer of the results of his actions. At this juncture, original pure
ego of the jéva, as the servant of Kåñëa, is covered by the false ego of his
subtle body. Then, when the jéva acquires a gross body, a further illusory
egotism is assumed by identifying with the bodily situation: ‘I am a brähmaëa,’
‘I am a king,’ ‘I am rich,’ I am poor,’ ‘I am sick,’ ‘I am healthy,’ ‘I am
suffering, or enjoying,’ ‘I am a wife,’ ‘I am a husband,’ and so on. 

“These false identities distort the original consciousness of the jéva.
Unalloyed kåñëa-prema is the pure, true, and original dharma of the jéva. When
perverted, this spiritual love manifests in the subtle body as the mundane
emotions of happiness and sorrow, love and hate, and so on. In the gross body,
the perversion intensifies even more and displays itself in the shape of
material sense gratification and other activities for bodily preservation and
enjoyment, such as eating, drinking, and sensuality. 

“The nitya-dharma of the jéva finds expression only in his pure state of
consciousness and is by nature complete, pure and eternal. The temporary dharmas
that assert themselves from the contaminated state of the jéva are
naimittika-dharmas, which we will explain in detail another day. 

“The pure vaiñëava-dharma presented in the Çrémad Bhägavatam is nitya-dharma.
All the religions of the world may be broadly grouped into three categories: (1)
nitya-dharma, (2) naimittika-dharma, and (3) anitya-dharma.

“A religion that denies the existence of Éçvara, the Supreme Controller,
refusing to discuss Him, and that does not accept that the soul is eternal is
anitya-dharma, false dharma contradictory to eternal dharma.

“A religion that believes in the eternality of both the Supreme Controller and
the jéva souls, but prescribes mundane, transient methods such as karma, jïäna,
and yoga for attaining the grace of Éçvara is naimittika-dharma. 

“Religions which prescribe pure, unmotivated, eternal, devotional service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead on the platform of prema are nitya-dharma. 

“Nitya-dharma may be given various names, depending on country, race, language,
and so on, yet, it is one in essence, excels all mundane preconditions, and is
supremely beneficial for the jéva. The best example of nitya-dharma is
Vaiñëavism, which is widely practiced in India, the purest state of which is the
spiritual teachings propagated to the entire world by our beloved Çré
Çacénandana. Therefore, the pure devotees, who steep themselves in rasa, the
spiritual mellows of transcendental love, embrace the instructions of Çré
Caitanya whole-heartedly.”

At this juncture, Sannyäsé Öhäkura said with folded hands, “Dear master, at
every moment, I am realising the incomparable excellence of the pure Vaiñëavism
that Çré Çacénandana has preached. I also perceive the deficiency of the
monistic philosophy propounded by Çré Çaìkaräcärya. Yet, I cannot refrain from
asking you this question, which keeps vexing me, “Is advaita-siddhi, the state
of oneness attained by merging with the impersonal Supreme, any different from
the mahäbhäva, the pinnacle of spiritual love, that Çré Caitanya embodied and
exhibited ?”

Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé prostrated himself respectfully upon hearing the
name of Çré Çaìkaräcärya. He said, “My dear sir, always remember this: …çaìkaraù
çaìkaraù säkñäd… ‘Çré Çaìkaräcärya is Lord Çiva himself.’ Çré Çaìkaräcärya is
the spiritual preceptor of all the Vaiñëavas and for this reason Çré Caitanya
has acclaimed him as an äcärya, great preceptor. Çré Çaìkaräcärya is a perfect
Vaiñëava. 

“At the time of his appearance, India urgently required a guëa-avatära, an
incarnation who presides over the material nature, because the spread of the
voidistic philosophy of Buddhism had caused India to practically give up the
cultivation and study of the Vedas, as well as the practice of
varëäçrama-dharma, the Vedic social system. Nihilistic Buddhism, known as
çünyaväda, directly denies the existence of a personal God and although hinting
at the principle of the jévätmä, the eternal spirit soul, Buddhism remains in
essence anitya-dharma. In those days, the brähmaëas had all but forsaken the
Vedic religion and converted to Buddhism. 

“At this historic moment, the extraordinarily powerful Lord Çiva appeared as Çré
Çaìkaräcärya and reinstated the pristine glory of the Vedas by transforming
nihilistic Voidism into monistic Brahmanism. This was a spectacular achievement,
for which India will always remain indebted to Çré Çaìkaräcärya. Works in the
world may be judged by two standards. Some works are tat-kälika, specific to a
particular time, and others are sarva-kälika, for all time. Çré Çaìkaräcärya’s
achievement, which resulted in great good for human society, belongs to the
former category. He laid a firm foundation, upon which Çré Rämänujäcärya and Çré
Madhväcärya later constructed the grand edifice of pure Vaiñëava philosophy.
Therefore, he is one of the greatest benefactors and historic torchbearers of
the Vaiñëava religion.

“The spiritual guidelines Çré Çaìkaräcärya laid down act as beacons to the
Vaiñëavas on their path of spiritual progress. For instance,
sambandha-jïäna—knowledge of the eternal relationships between the jéva,
prakåti, and Bhagavän—is absolutely essential for the conditioned jévas. The
Vaiñëavas and Çré Çaìkaräcärya share the understanding that the cit-vastu,
spiritual existence, is supramundane and transcendental to the subtle and gross
material bodies of the external material nature. They are also of the same
opinion regarding the spiritual nature of the jéva. They agree, too, that
liberation means giving up one’s attachment to the material world. Up to the
stage of mukti, the Vaiñëavas concur with Çré Çaìkaräcärya on many philosophical
points. Çré Çaìkaräcärya also taught that a soul purifies his consciousness by
worshiping the Supreme Lord, Çré Hari, after which he attains mukti.

“What Çré Çaìkaräcärya remains silent about, however, are the wonderful
realizations the jéva experiences after attaining mukti. Çré Çaìkaräcärya was
confident that once the jévas were set on the path of liberation attainable by
worshiping the Supreme Lord, Çré Hari, they would gradually develop a taste and
an attachment for devotional service and ultimately become pure devotees of the
Lord. Hence, Çré Çaìkaräcärya—after plainly indicating the proper way—did not
delve further into the esoteric aspects of Vaiñëava philosophy. Those who
scrutinizingly study Çré Çaìkaräcärya’s commentaries can comprehend his
underlying intention, but those who ponder only the external and superficial
aspects of his teachings are diverted from the Vaiñëava path.

“From a certain viewpoint, advaita-siddhi and the mahäbhäva of prema may seem
identical. However, the narrow understanding of spiritual oneness in
advaita-siddhi is certainly different from the devotional ecstasy of prema. A
brief explanation should suffice to highlight their differences. 

“First, we must properly analyse the subject of prema. Prema can be simply
defined as that tattva, principle, and rasa, spiritual mellow, which evokes
spontaneous, mutual attraction between spiritual entities. The sentiment, which
eternally draws all the spiritual entities to Kåñëa, is called kåñëa-prema. In
the union of prema, it is imperative that the two spiritual entities retain
separate, individual identities. Çré Kåñëa is eternally situated in His unique
position and all the jévas retain their individual identities in an eternal mood
of loving devotional service towards Him. This is the absolute, axiomatic
principle in the philosophy of prema. 

“Inherent in prema are three things: the äsvädaka, the relisher; äsvädya, the
object being relished; and äsvädana, the act of relishing. If the relisher and
the relished were to merge into absolute oneness through the exchanges of prema,
then prema could not be nitya-siddha, eternally self-perfected truth. If,
however, advaita-siddhi is defined as the pure state of the spiritual living
entity—in union with his natural original spiritual nature and thus untainted by
any material contact—then prema and advaita-siddhi indicate the same region of
transcendental existence. 

“However, the contemporary scholars of the Çaìkaräcärya school are not content
with simply accepting advaita-siddhi as a specific stage on the path of
spiritual perfection. Rather, they stubbornly claim advaita-siddhi to be itself
the absolute ultimate goal of spiritual realization wherein the living entities
become indistinguishably ‘one’ with Brahman. In this way, such contemporary
Çankarite scholars misconstrue the actual Vedic truth. Their philosophical
aberration extirpates the quality of eternality in prema; hence, the Vaiñëavas
have concluded that such philosophy is non-Vedic. 

“Çrépäda Çaìkaräcärya described the concept of advaita, non-dualism, as the
pure, transcendental state of the Absolute Truth. Unfortunately, his confused
followers are unable to grasp the esoteric import of this philosophy and in the
process they are denigrating his good reputation by ascribing an incorrect
interpretation to his statements. They describe the transcendental conditions of
prema as mäyä, material illusion, and thus the doctrine they preach is known as
mäyäväda philosophy. It is most degraded. 

“The followers of this philosophy, the mäyävädés, categorically deny the
existence of more than one spiritual entity, the Brahman. They even refuse to
accept that the element of prema is intrinsic to the spiritual substance. Their
theory is that as long as Brahman, the non-dual transcendental truth, remains
singular, He is transcendental to mäyä. They propose that when He accepts form
and becomes the jéva, He acquires diverse shapes and is thus afflicted by mäyä.
Therefore, they consider the eternal, pure and absolutely spiritual body of the
Deity as an illusion of mäyä. They even insist that the jéva’s separate and
individual identity is illusory and thus prema and the transcendental
transformations of prema are also ultimately illusory. With the help of this
logic, and as an obvious consequence, they establish that advaita-jïäna,
monistic realization, is free of illusion. Their misinterpreted version of
advaita-siddhi and the Vaiñëava acceptance of prema are philosophically poles
apart. 

“Çré Caitanya’s instructions on the process of relishing prema and His teachings
in general, as exemplified by His character and pastimes, are all absolute and
transcendental. They embody the acme of perfection, the highest stage of
advaita-siddhi. Mahä-bhäva, the pinnacle of bhäva—loving spiritual emotion—is an
ecstatic transformation of unalloyed prema. One experiences extreme divine
exultation in loving Kåñëa, relationship with whom produces an individual and
intrinsic effusion of sublime ecstatic emotion, both in the relisher and in the
object relished. The intimate relationship between these two acquires an
extraordinary and wonderful presence. In contrast, the inconsistent mäyäväda
philosophy is unable to make any contribution in the actual true understanding
of prema.”

At this point, Sannyäsé Öhäkura, speaking very respectfully, said, “Dear master!
Now I am fully convinced that this mäyäväda philosophy is indeed false and
inept. By your mercy, all my doubts have been dissipated and I am feeling a
strong urge to instantly discard my mäyävädé sannyäsé apparel.”

Bäbäjé Mahäräja, “Dear sir! My advice in this regard is that one should be
dispassionate about one’s outer dress—towards it practice neither attachment,
nor hate. When the heart and consciousness become purified from within, the
outer garments are also automatically rectified. When too much stress is laid on
dress codes and grooming external looks, then disciplining the consciousness
within is neglected. My opinion is that after inner cleansing, one is naturally
inspired to conduct oneself in accordance with the behaviour of saintly
devotees, and thus one’s outward appearance—dress and so on—will be freed from
blemishes in the natural course of events. Just surrender completely to the
ideals of Çré Caitanya and then whatever external activities are inspired in you
will be executed with proper consciousness. Always remember the following
instruction of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu in the Çré Caitanya-caritämåta,
Madhya-lélä, 16.238–9:

markaöa-vairägya nä kara loka dekhäïä
yathä-yogya viñaya bhuïja’ anäsakta haïä

antare niñöhä kara, bähye loka-vyaahära
acirät kåñëa tomäya karibe uddhära 

“‘You should not make yourself into a show-bottle devotee and become a false
renunciant. For the time being, enjoy the material world in a befitting way, but
do not become attached to such enjoyment. Within your heart, you should keep
yourself very faithful, but externally you may behave like an ordinary man. Then
soon Kåñëa will be very pleased and deliver you from the clutches of mäyä.’”

Sannyäsé Öhäkura understood the importance of Bäbäjé Mahäräja’s words and
refrained from further mention of the subject of dress. With folded hands, he
addressed Bäbäjé Mahäräja, “Dear Master, I have surrendered to your lotus feet
as your disciple, therefore whatever instructions you give me I will accept
without argument. After listening to your teachings, I have realized that in
vaiñëava-dharma pure love of Çré Kåñëa is alone considered love and this indeed
is the nitya-dharma of the jéva. Nevertheless, different countries practice
different religions, how should I think about them?”

Bäbäjé Mahäräja, “My dear sir, dharma is one and not many. Actually, the jéva
has but one dharma, known as the vaiñëava-dharma. Dharma may appear to be
different according to the various languages, countries, and races, and this one
jaiva-dharma, constitutional eternal function of the soul, may be referred to by
the various peoples by many different names, but no one can artificially create
a new jaiva-dharma. The unblemished pristine love for the Supreme Absolute Whole
experienced by the minute particle of spiritual substance—the jéva—is defined as
jaiva-dharma.”

“However, the jéva possesses a variety of cultural habits and natural traits
which binds his religious practices to certain material conformities, thus
making his true dharma appear refracted. Therefore, to free jaiva-dharma from
misconception and bring into focus the pristine standards of actual dharma, the
jéva’s true religion has been named vaiñëava-dharma. To the same degree that
vaiñëava-dharma practices are present in other religious systems, those
religions are to be considered pure. 

“A few days ago in Våndävana, I humbly placed a question to Çréla Sanätana
Gosvämé, who is an eternal and confidential associate of the Supreme Lord. My
query was, ‘Is the concept of içhqh, an Arabic word used in Islam, the same as
prema, or is there a difference?’

“Çréla Gosvämé is an erudite scholar, well versed in all scriptures, and
especially his proficiency in Arabic is astounding. Many other accomplished
scholars such as Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé and Çréla Jéva Gosvämé were also present in
that assembly. I shall now report Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé’s words: 

“‘Yes, the word içhqh indeed means prema. The Muslims use this term even to
describe the worship of God, however, in common terminology, it has now come to
imply mundane love affairs. The mundane emotion that the word içhqh indicates in
the story of the committed lovers, Lailä and Majnün, and in the writing of the
famous poet, Häfiz, demonstrates that the Muslim religious scholars were unable
to understand accurately çuddha-cit-vastu, pure transcendence. As a result, they
now refer to the emotions of the subtle body and the physical urges of the gross
body as içhqh—their misconception of prema. Further, they have failed to
perceive not only the pure spiritual nature, but also the truth about the jéva’s
spontaneous and spotless love of Kåñëa. In all their religious texts, I have
never come across discussions upon divine, transcendental love. Conspicuously,
the spiritual emotion of prema is present and thoroughly elucidated in
vaiñëava-dharma alone.

“‘The Muslim concept of rüh is not the same as the çuddha-jéva, pure spirit
soul, mentioned in the Vedas. In fact, one gets the impression that rüh more
closely describes the baddha-jéva, conditioned soul. Knowledge of pure love of
Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, is missing in all the other religious literatures. Pure love
for Çré Kåñëa is described in these words of Çrémad-Bhägavatam 1.1.2: …dharmaù
projjhita-kaitavo… “Completely rejecting all religious activities which are
materially motivated, this Bhägavata Puräëa propounds the highest truth.”

“‘The Vaiñëava text, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, delineates, in detail, this pure,
sublime love of Kåñëa, a love without deceit or caprice. I am very sure that
before Çré Caitanya no one had ever taught the science of pure love of Godhead,
Çré Kåñëa, as exhaustively as He. If my words inspire faith and devotion in you,
then subscribe whole-heartedly to this philosophy.’ After hearing the
instructions of Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé, I repeatedly offered him my obeisances.”

Truly moved by these instructions, Sannyäsé Öhäkura immediately fell at the feet
of Bäbäjé Mahäräja in humble gratitude. 

Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé Mahäräja continued, “My dear devotee, I am about to
reply to your second question about how the dharma of the jéva can be eternal,
if it is intrinsic to his created constitution. Please listen attentively. 

“Sanskrit terms such as: jéva-såñöi, creation and birth of the jéva; and
jéva-gäthäm, the formation of the jéva; etc., are used in a mundane sense.
Material word meanings evoke mundane feelings and impressions. Material time,
within this illusory energy field, has three conditions—past, present and
future. Time in the spiritual world has a singular aspect; it is always in the
present, whereas past and future are absent. The jéva and the Supreme Lord, Çré
Kåñëa, exist in that spiritual time. Hence, the jéva is eternal and
indestructible and his dharma, kåñëa-prema, is also always eternally present.
The mundane conditions of birth, growth, decay, etc., as brought about by the
influence of material time have been applied to jéva only since his
incarceration in this material world, but the eternal rüpa, form, and dharma, of
the jéva have already been determined before his entrance into this material
energy. The minute size of the jéva does not in any way divest him of the
indestructible, transcendental nature that is his intrinsic, eternal dharma.
Whatever exists in the spiritual world ever remains the same because the
divisions of past and future are absent.

“The jéva and his dharma are therefore both eternally present and
indestructible. Although I am elucidating these topics, you can fathom their
meanings only to degree of your realization of the spiritual nature. I am giving
just indications; you must perceive their purport in deep meditation. Only to
the extent that one can extricate one’s understanding from the perplexities of
material enthrallment can one become enlightened about the spiritual world.
Mundane logic and argument will not enable one to properly comprehend these
subjects.

“First, one must repeatedly endeavour to perceive one’s çuddha-svarüpa, pure
spiritual identity, and chant Kåñëa’s name purely, then one’s true nature—one’s
jaiva-dharma—will begin to gradually assert itself. Neither añöäìga-yoga, mystic
yoga, nor brahma-jïäna, empirical knowledge of the featureless all-pervasive
Brahman, can hone one’s spiritual perception; direct devotional service to Çré
Kåñëa can alone reawaken the self-perfected jaiva-dharma inherent within
oneself. Simply chant harinäma with full enthusiasm—this in itself is considered
pure devotional service. After chanting regularly and offenselessly for even
just a short time, one will experience a wonderful attraction to harinäma. Along
with increasing attraction, realization of one’s spiritual nature will be
gradually attained. Of all the different practices of devotion, chanting is
pre-eminent, and offers quick results. Çréla Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja has written a
wonderful book recording Çré Caitanya’s instructions named the Çré
Caitanya-caritämåta; there in the Antya-lélä, 4.70–71, we find stated: 

bhajanera madhye çreñöha nava-vidhä bhakti
‘kåñëa-prema,’ ‘kåñëa’ dite dhare mahä-çakti

“‘Amongst all the ways of executing devotional service, the nine prescribed
methods are the best, for these processes have great potency to deliver Kåñëa
and ecstatic love for Him.’

tära madhye sarva-çreñöha näma-saìkértana
niraparädhe näma laile päya prema-dhana

“‘Of the nine processes of devotional service, the most important is to always
chant harinäma. If one does so, avoiding the ten kinds of offences, one very
easily obtains the most valuable jewel of prema.’ 

“O learned one, if you were to ask me, ‘Who is a Vaiñëava?’ my answer would be
simply, ‘One who chants the names of Kåñëa purely.’ There are three types of
Vaiñëavas: kaniñöha, neophyte, madhyama, intermediate, and uttama, most
advanced. One who occasionally chants Kåñëa’s names is a kaniñöha Vaiñëava. One
who constantly chants Kåñëa’s names is a madhyama Vaiñëava. An uttama Vaiñëava
spontaneously inspires others to chant Kåñëa’s names by his very presence.
According to the teachings of Çré Caitanya, one must strictly go by these
symptoms to categorize Vaiñëavas.”

Inebriated by Bäbäjé’s nectarean instructions, Sannyäsé Öhäkura began to sing: 

Hare Kåñëa Hare Kåñëa Kåñëa Kåñëa Hare Hare
Hare Räma Hare Räma Räma Räma Hare Hare

He gently swayed to and fro in a stately dance and immediately realized that he
was acquiring ruci, a sublime taste, for chanting harinäma. Falling at his
guru’s lotus feet, he prayed, “O divine master! Please be merciful unto this
lowly wretch.”

Thus ends the Second Chapter of the Jaiva-dharma entitled: The Nitya-dharma of
the Living Entity Is Pure and Everlasting 

JDH 3: Naimittika-dharma: Impermanent Religious Duties Are Incomplete,
Pedestrian, Impure and Evanescent

Chapter Three
Naimittika-dharma: Impermanent Religious Duties Are Incomplete, Pedestrian,
Impure and Evanescent

One hour past midnight, Sannyäsé Öhäkura was deep in meditation, chanting
harinäma. All of a sudden, he walked out from his bhajana-kuöéra into the silky
night, and slowly climbed to the top of the hill at the edge of the Godruma
woods. He peered towards the north. At the zenith, the full moon waved a magic
wand and the surrounding landscape and nearby Navadvépa glowed beautifully in
silver glory. Mäyäpura, nestling cosily in the distance, caught his attention. 

All at once, Sannyäsé Öhäkura exhaled and exclaimed in wonder, “Behold! I now
see revealed the wondrous and blissful dhäma. Large temples and archways, all
constructed with precious gems, glitter magnificently, setting aglow the shores
and peacefully flowing waters of the Jähnavé Gaìgä. From many quarters, the
congregational chanting of harinäma swells resoundingly, heaving upwards and
engulfing the satin sky. Like Çré Närada, thousands of devotees are playing upon
vénäs and swirling about in stately dance. On one side, the chief of the devas,
demigods, Çré Mahädeva, white as a lily, plays upon his òamarü drum, dancing
wildly and singing, ‘O my dear Viçvambhara! Be merciful to me!’ and then falls
to the ground in ecstasy.

“In one corner, Lord Brahmä, addressing an august assembly of Vedic sages,
explains the verse from the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad, 3.12:

mahän-prabhur vai puruñaù sattvasy aiçaù pravartakaù
sunirmalam imam präptià içäno jyotir vyayaù 

“‘Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is the Supreme Controller, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He is the origin of all inspiration and intelligence within man.
Immortality and unalloyed peace is attained by His mercy alone. He is of a
golden hue and immeasurably effulgent. He is infinite, inexhaustible, and the
embodiment of divine love.’

“In another area, jubilant and dancing devas, headed by Indra, the king of
heaven, exult in ecstatic helter-skelter activities. They sing a loud chorus,
‘Jaya Prabhu Gauracandra! Jaya Nityänanda!’ Sitting in the trees, the birds coo
jubilantly, ‘Gaura-Nitäi!’ Bumblebees fly erratically throughout the flower
gardens, inebriated with the ambrosia of Çré Gauracandra’s sweet name. Maddened
by the delicious nectar of Gauracandra’s name, Mother Nature displays the lush
profusion of her splendour. 

“Alas! Where does this gorgeous Mäyäpura-dhäma hide during the daytime? And
exactly what is inspiring me to behold this divine vision now?”

Throughout the transcendental revelation, Sannyäsé Öhäkura was remembering his
Gurudeva, and he now spoke aloud, “O master! Today, I realize that you have
blessed me to perceive the transcendental realm of Mäyäpura. From today onwards,
I will strive to present myself as a devotee of Çré Caitanya. Seeing that
everyone in the spiritual land of Navadvépa is decorated with tulasé neck-beads,
tilaka and harinäma chaddars, I will also dress like them.” 

Having made this decision, Sannyäsé Öhäkura fell into a blissful trance,
gradually calming himself and regaining his equilibrium. Although, in the
meantime, the miraculous vision had vanished from sight, he exclaimed, “Oh, how
fortunate am I that I was able to see, if only for a few moments, the spiritual
abode of Çré Navadvépa.”

Next morning, Sannyäsé Öhäkura hastened to the river and sent his mäyävädé
sannyäsé staff afloat downstream. Putting three strands of tulasé neck-beads
around his neck and applying the vertical ürdhva-puëòra Vaiñëava tilaka mark
upon his forehead, he began to dance and sing, “Hari! Hari!” Later, the
Vaiñëavas of Godruma-dvépa, upon seeing the wonderful transformation in his
appearance and demeanour, blessed him and fell to the ground to offer him their
obeisances. 

Seeing this, Sannyäsé Öhäkura became bashful and said to the assembly, “How
extraordinary! I have accepted the Vaiñëava style of dress solely to attract the
blessings of the Vaiñëavas, but instead I am confronted with a new dilemma. I
have heard my guru often repeat this instruction from the Çré
Caitanya-caritämåta, Antya-lélä 20.21: 

tåëäd api sunécena taror iva sahiñëunä
amäninä mänadena kértanéyaù sadä hariù 

“‘One who thinks himself lower than the grass, who is more tolerant than a tree,
and who does not expect personal honour, but is always prepared to give all
respect to others, can very easily always chant harinäma.’” 

Within himself, Sannyäsé Öhäkura seriously considered the following: “I regard
all these Vaiñëavas as my gurus. Yet, they are now offering obeisances to me,
what future does my spiritual life hold?” Weighed down with such thoughts, his
footsteps trod heavily back to his guru. He prostrated himself before
Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé, who had come to the woody retreat of Çré
Mädhavé-mälaté Maëòapa to chant harinäma. Seeing the wonderful transformation in
Sannyäsé Öhäkura, both in attire and sentiment, he stood up and embraced his
disciple, showering him with cascading tears, and said, “O my dear Vaiñëava
däsa, I feel great spiritual exhilaration by the touch of your blessed body.”

Bäbäjé’s pronouncement gave Sannyäsé Öhäkura a new name, Vaiñëava däsa, to
replace his old one. This day began a new and wonderful life for Sannyäsé
Öhäkura, helping him to shed the stigmas of the mäyävädé false ego, the saffron
robes, and the false pride of considering himself in possession of vast
knowledge on account of his designation as a sannyäsé.

Later in the afternoon, Vaiñëavas from Navadvépa-dhäma and Çré Godruma assembled
in the bowers of Pradyumna-kuïja to receive spiritual instructions and blessings
from Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé. They were patiently seated all about him,
softly chanting harinäma upon their tulasé beads. Chanting and saintly
association exerted a wonderful effect upon the Vaiñëavas and spiritual emotions
welled up within their hearts. Their eyes brimming with tears, they called out,
“O my Çré Gauräìga! Prabhu Nityänanda! O my Lord, Sétänätha! All glories to
Çacénandana, son of Çré Çacémätä!” They discussed Kåñëa conscious topics with
each other. Some were circumambulating Tulasé devé and others were greeting one
another with prostrated obeisances as Vaiñëava däsa arrived upon the scene.
First, he circumambulated Tulasé devé, then fell to the ground, rolling in the
dust tread by the hallowed feet of the Vaiñëava saints. Some of the senior
Vaiñëavas whispered, “Is he not the Sannyäsé Öhäkura? Look at him, what a
miraculous change!”

Still rolling on the ground, Vaiñëava däsa began to petition the assembly,
“Today, I am extremely grateful to have received the dust from the lotus feet of
the Vaiñëavas. By the mercy of my Gurudeva, I have come to know in full that for
the jéva the dust of the lotus feet of the Vaiñëavas is the only means to attain
perfection. The dust of the lotus feet of the pure Vaiñëava, the sanctified
water of his footbath known as caraëämåta, and the remnants from his prasädam
plate known as adharämåta are the three transcendental ingredients constituting
both the doctor’s prescription against bhava-roga, the material disease, as well
as the appropriate diet for the patient. 

“Their potency is not merely restricted to curing the material disease of
nescience. Even one who has already been cured of the material disease is
protected against re-infection by the further inoculation of the highest
spiritual bliss. My dear Vaiñëava saints! Please do not think that I am making
an ostentatious exhibition of my erudition, in fact, recently the demon of false
pride has been exorcised from my heart.

“I was born into a brähmaëa family, studied all the different scriptures, and
finally entered the renounced order of life. My false ego knew no bounds.
Nevertheless, since the time I was first attracted to the Vaiñëava philosophy,
the seed of humility has been implanted in my heart. Now, gradually, by your
grace, I have discarded the arrogance born of high lineage, the prestige of
material education, and the pride that so often accompanies the exalted position
of sannyäsa. Now, therefore, I have concluded that I am simply a shelterless
infinitesimal soul. My life is meaningless without finding the sanctuary of the
lotus feet of the Vaiñëavas. My birth as a brähmaëa, my scholarship, and the
renounced religious order were inexorably dragging me into the dark well of
illusion. I have opened up my mind to you Vaiñëavas without reservation, so now
you are free to deal with me, your servant, in any way you deem fit.”

Many of the Vaiñëavas, after hearing Vaiñëava däsa’s earnest confessions,
addressed him, saying, “O saintly soul! We have always been greedy to receive
the dust from the feet of Vaiñëavas of your stature. Please kindly offer it to
us and make our lives worthwhile. You are the receptacle of Bäbäjé Mahäräja’s
divine grace, thus sanctify us by your association. As it is stated in the
Båhan-näradéya Puräëa:

bhaktis tu bhagavad-bhakta-saìgena parijäyate 
sat-saìgaù präpyate pumbhiù sukåtaiù pürva-saïcitaiù 

“‘Devotional sentiments are evoked by the purifying association of advanced
devotees. The jéva is able to come into close contact with a pure devotee only
by accruing sufficient pious results from many previous births.’ 

“We were able to attain your holy association only on account of the piety we
have accumulated in our past lives, which has fostered devotion. And now, on the
strength of your association, we are hopeful of achieving pure devotion to the
Supreme Lord.”

Once these mutual exchanges between the sincere and humble Vaiñëavas were
concluded, Vaiñëava däsa took his place to one side of the seated assembly,
enhancing its dignity. The new chanting beads and bead-bag he carried in his
hand acquired an auspicious aura, as this august assembly counted another very
fortunate soul in its midst that day. 

On that very day, another fortunate soul, a gentleman from Çäntipura, was seated
in the gathering of Vaiñëavas. From childhood on, this person had studied Arabic
and Farsi, leading him to adopt the mannerisms of the ruling Muslim nobility,
and bringing him position and prestige in the land. As a resident of Navadvépa,
he belonged to a high brähmaëa lineage and had inherited vast properties of
land. He had become an expert in the art of diplomacy and politics and for many
years he had been exploiting his position of power for his own advantage and had
enjoyed many benefits, but simple happiness still eluded him. As a last resort,
he had begun to chant harinäma. 

Early in life, while still a young boy, experts in the field of Indian classical
music had taught him, and he considered that such instruction qualified him to
occasionally lead the kértana sessions of the Vaiñëavas. However, when
previously, he had lead some kértanas, the Vaiñëavas were apparently not fond of
his typically palace-court classical touch. Nonetheless, he had introduced these
classical variations into the kértanas, oblivious of the Vaiñëavas’ feelings.
Attempting to parade his musical ability, he had stared at the faces of the
Vaiñëavas, awaiting a response, hoping for some appreciation. For quite some
days now, this had continued. However, quite suddenly, a few days earlier, he
had unexpectedly started to feel increasing pleasure in singing harinäma. Thus,
he had taken up residence in the house of a Vaiñëava of Çré Godruma to enable
himself to participate more conveniently in kértana with the Vaiñëavas of Çré
Navadvépa-dhäma.

Today, his present landlord had accompanied him to the gathering of Vaiñëavas in
the woody bowers of Pradyumna-kuïja. Whilst sitting there, he had observed
keenly how humbly the Vaiñëavas treated each other. He also attentively listened
to the talk Vaiñëava däsa, during which certain doubts had welled up in his
mind. Already an eloquent speaker, he boldly addressed the assembly, enquiring
as follows, “The religious scripture, the Manu-saàhitä, and other småti
dharma-çästras have described the brähmaëas as the highest class of men in the
social order. Further, they have prescribed tri-sandhyä-vandana, the thrice
daily chanting of the brahma-gäyatré-mantra and other prayers, as the
nitya-karma—daily, eternal, religious duties of the brähmaëas to be performed
without exception. If this be so, then why are the activities of the Vaiñëavas
opposed to these religious duties?”

Vaiñëavas are not fond of dialectics. Had this question been raised by caste
brähmaëas, who are known to be argumentative, the Vaiñëavas would, to avoid
confrontation, have declined to answer. However, in this case, since the
enquirer was devotionally inclined and a participant in their kértanas, everyone
conceded that if Çré Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé were to answer the question,
it would very much satisfy the assembly. Bäbäjé Mahäräja respectfully heard the
unanimous decision of the Vaiñëavas. He first offered prostrated obeisances to
the assembly and then began to speak.

“Dear exalted Vaiñëavas, if you have no objection, then let the stalwart
Vaiñëava däsa tackle this question exhaustively.” Everyone approved of this
suggestion. 

Vaiñëava däsa felt very elated upon hearing his guru’s suggestion and with
sincere humility he began to deliberate aloud, “I am an extremely fallen soul in
a dire condition. It would be most presumptuous of me to speak anything before
this learned and august assembly, yet also I cannot contradict the command of my
guru. Thus, I have decided that whatever knowledge I have received by way of the
nectarean instruction from the lotus lips of my guru I shall sincerely strive to
repeat from memory.”

He then walked up to Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé and smeared the dust of his
lotus feet all over his own body and head. Standing erect, he started his
dissertation, “Let the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa Caitanya, the
embodiment of divine bliss and the ultimate source of all partial and plenary
expansions of the Absolute Lord, whose effulgence is Brahman, and whose partial
manifestation is Paramätmä, the Supersoul within all living entities, inspire us
with superior intelligence. 

“The Manu-saàhitä and other dharma-çästras written down by other great sages are
småti-çästras, corollaries written in pursuance of the original çruti-çästras
known as the Vedas, which are eternal transcendental sound directly manifested
from the Supreme Lord, Çri Kåñëa, and are thus absolutely self-perfected and
free of mundane defect. Being corollaries in pursuance of the directions of the
Vedas, the dharma-çästras are held in high esteem, just as the law books
defining authorized and unauthorized actions in human society are similarly
highly regarded throughout civilised society. 

“In regard to religious practice, human nature is divided into two states:
vaidhé, regulated by the rules and regulations of çästra; and rägänugä,
spontaneous attraction to the Lord’s service. As long as the consciousness is
under the influence of mäyä, material illusion, the guidance of the vaidhé
practice remains an important necessity. However, once the consciousness shakes
off the shackles of mäyä, it leaves the vaidhé state and manifests its innate
rägänugä nature, which is the jéva’s original and pure
constitution—transcendental and free from all material inebriety. 

“The involvement with matter of the originally pure spirit soul is dissolved
only by the desire of Çré Kåñëa. Therefore, as long as Çré Kåñëa does not bestow
liberation upon the aspiring sädhaka-jéva, his material entanglement and
position is kñayonmukha—merely in the process of gradual development towards
emancipation. In this intermediate condition, the jéva, although gradually
progressing towards liberation, has factually not fully attained liberation.
However, when the jéva is finally actually liberated by the grace of Çré Kåñëa,
his rägätmikä nature, pure and spontaneous spiritual sentiment, becomes
self-manifest as a tangible truth. 

“The residents of the spiritual realm of Vraja are by nature rägätmikä,
spontaneously fixed in devotion to Çré Kåñëa. The jévas, in the intermediate
state, who strive progressively towards emancipation, take shelter of the
rägätmikä nature and thus become rägänugäs, followers of the rägätmikä devotees.
This is a coveted and excellent position for the jéva because as long as the
jéva lacks this position of rägänugä, his consciousness remains unhappily
engrossed in illusory material entanglement. 

“As a result of close and habitual contact with the material energy, the
ignorant conditioned jéva interprets his nisarga, illusory material
conditioning, as his innate and original nature. At this stage, he cannot
develop spontaneous spiritual attraction for the supramundane state. In his
relationships with matter, his consciousness is deeply engrossed in the false
material conceptions of ‘me’ and ‘mine’. 

“In the state of consciousness which dictates ‘I am this body’ and ‘this body
and its extensions are mine’ the normal reactions are affection towards persons
and objects providing the body with luxuries and comfort, and conversely, hatred
towards persons and objects hindering the acquisition of such luxuries. Sucked
into this whirlpool of duality, the foolish jéva expresses love or hate on the
physical, social, and regulative levels. He discriminates between friend and
foe, becoming caught up in trifles on the material level. Unnecessarily, he
cultivates affection for wealth and women, thereby chaining himself to the
seesaw routine of happiness and distress. This is known as saàsära, material
life. Attached to this wheel of saàsära, the jéva experiences repeatedly the
results of his actions, which thereby produce birth and death, success and
failure.

“In this situation, the conditioned jéva finds spiritual involvement a
troublesome burden and he cannot realize the truth and necessity of spiritual
life. Alas! He forgets that spiritual activities are his inherent occupation and
eternal nature. Being so mesmerized by mundane attractions, he is forced to
witness his own downfall—though in reality, he is an infinitesimal part of the
Supreme Absolute.

“Most people caught in the wheel of saàsära do not see this fallen misery as a
serious affliction of the enthralled jéva and thus never consider attaining the
rägätmikä nature or even the rägänuga nature themselves. In fact, in their
present covered state this is far beyond their reach or even imagination. Seldom
does the rägänuga nature appear spontaneously in the jéva’s heart and then only
by dint of the special mercy of a powerful sädhu, holy person. Therefore, the
platform of rägänuga is very rare and almost impossible to attain, and those in
saàsära are generally deprived of this rare state of existence.

“However, the Supreme Lord is omniscient and unlimitedly benevolent! Seeing that
the living entities—imprisoned by the clutches of mäyä—are deprived of a direct
perception of the transcendental nature, the Lord therefore considers suitable
means for their ultimate benefit: ‘How may the living entities, mesmerized by
mäyä, best recollect their lost Kåñëa consciousness? Association with sädhus
enlightens the living entities about their real identity as the transcendental
eternal servants of the Supreme. However, there are no specific injunctions for
the conditioned souls to associate with sädhus. How then may such beneficial
association be directed to take place automatically? Therefore, for the greater
benefit of the people in general, the introduction of a vidhi-märga, a
regulative spiritual discipline, carefully directing association with sädhus is
imperative.’ Thus, by the Supreme Lord’s benign grace, the brilliant sun of
scripture appeared in the sky that is the hearts of the devotees in order to
illumine the pertinent religious regulations and instructions amongst all living
entities. 

“First, there were the Vedas, which were ordained to be in three sections: (1)
karma, fruitive activities; (2) jïana, empirical knowledge; (3) bhakti, loving
devotion to the Supreme Lord.

“The living entities, deluded by mäyä, find themselves in varying degrees of
conditioning. Some are in deep ignorance, others slightly knowledgeable, still
others fairly well educated on a wide range of subjects, and so on. The
scriptures offer various instructions to the living entities in accordance with
their different mentalities, which are defined as adhikära, qualification and
eligibility. Adhikära is as varied as the jévas themselves; however, these
various states of eligibility are grouped into three categories, according to
their most obvious symptoms: karma-adhikära, jïana-adhikära, and prema-adhikära.
These categories are also specified in the Vedas, wherein corresponding vidhi,
rules and regulations, are specified. These do’s and don’ts of scripture define
the behaviour of the living entities grouped according to the three types of
adhikära. 

“This vidhi is described as vaidhé-dharma, regulative religious principles. The
tendency that impels a jéva to embrace vaidhé-dharma indicates his vaidhé
nature, a love of scriptural discipline. One who is bereft of this tendency to
follow scriptural rules and regulations is an unruly, uncultured being,
generally pledged to illicit, sinful activities. People of this type are
ostracised from the Vedas and condemned as mlecchas. 

“The duties of the three adhikära groups described in the Vedas have been
elaborated upon by the wise sages and handed down to us as the saàhitä-çästras,
scriptures that are corollaries to the original Vedic literature. Manu and other
great Vedic paëòitas have delineated the karma-adhikära in twenty
dharma-çästras, religious treatises. Similarly, great munis and philosophers
have explained the jïäna-adhikära in çästras dealing with logic and empirical
analysis. The great åñis, sages, authors of the puräëas and the sattvika tantric
treatises have conclusively propounded the duties and principles of bhakti and
their practical application. By their chaste adherence to their basis and
source, the original çruti, all these småti-çästras are very much a part of the
Vedas.

“The marvellous conclusion of all these småti-çästras is presented in the
Bhagavad-gétä. Research into the Bhagavad-gétä reveals the following formula: If
karma, fruitive work, does not aim at the attainment of jïana, knowledge, karma
is rendered impotent and thus useless. Similarly, if both karma and jïana do not
culminate in bhakti-yoga, devotional service, they must also be discarded on the
grounds of having become atheistic heretical practices.

“Thus, the vaiñëava-siddhänta, Vedic philosophical conclusion, is that
karma-yoga, jïana-yoga, and bhakti-yoga constitute ultimately the same path of
yoga, process of spiritual elevation. For the conditioned soul, the initial step
towards self-realization begins with taking up karma. Later, he is promoted to
karma-yoga, then to jïäna-yoga, and finally to bhakti-yoga. Unless these
different levels are properly explained to the deluded living entity, he is
unable to reach the highest platform of bhakti-yoga.

“What exactly is karma? Any endeavour, physical or mental, carried out to
sustain life is karma. It is of two kinds: çubha, auspicious; and açubha,
inauspicious. Auspicious karma begets positive results, while inauspicious karma
brings negative results to the living entity. Further names for inauspicious
karma are: papa, sin; and vikarma, perverted unscriptural activities. Abstaining
from auspicious work is called akarma. Both vikarma and akarma are bad; only
auspicious work is good, which is of three kinds: nitya, daily and constant
obligatory duties; naimittika, occasional, and ritualistic; and kämya, desirous,
motivated.

“Kämya-karma is shamefully selfish, therefore in the scriptures it is considered
ignoble, whereas the virtues of nitya-karma and naimittika-karma are praised.
After deliberating on the good and bad aspects of karma, the scriptures have
concluded that in truth only nitya, naimittika, and kämya—not akarma or
vikarma—make up karma. Since kämya-karma has been rejected as being dispensable
because of its selfish nature, therefore only nitya and naimittika karma really
fit the descriptions of karma. 

“Nitya-karma is defined as activities beneficial for body, mind, community and
afterlife. It is everyone’s duty to execute nitya-karma. Daily rites such as
sandhyä, chanting the gäyatré-mantra thrice a day; vandana, chanting of Vedic
prayers; using righteous means to protect the health of society and of the
physical body; and following the path of truthfulness are all considered as
nitya-karma. Offering oblations and performing other rites for the satisfaction
of the departed souls of the forefathers, executing penances to counteract
sinful reactions, and so on are naimittika-karma. If an activity begins as a
motivated action and yet gradually becomes a regulated responsibility, it is
called naimittika-karma. 

“In order to ensure that nitya and naimittika-karma are properly performed, the
compilers of the scriptures have closely studied the characteristics and natural
propensities of human beings, and to help them reach this objective, they have
formulated a way of life known as varëäçrama-dharma. The essence of this system
lies in the fact that human beings are endowed with volition, and, according to
their natural tendency towards a particular occupation, may be thus categorized
into four groups, which are known as the varëas: brähmaëas, teachers and
priests; kñatriyas, social administrators and the martial class; vaiçyas,
businessmen and agriculturists; and çüdras, artisans and labourers. Furthermore,
the stages of life are also of four kinds, known as the äçramas: brahmacäri,
unmarried student life; gåhastha, married family life; vänaprastha, retirement
from family responsibilities; and sannyäsé, renounced ascetic life. Those who
are addicted to akarma and vikarma are outcastes, ostracized from the four
varëas and äçramas of the varëäçrama system.

“The four varëas are determined according to a person’s nature, birth, actions,
and personal qualifications. If the varëa is decided on the basis of birth
alone, then the original purpose of the varëäçrama system is destroyed. The
äçramas are ascertained by a person’s stage on the social progression:
brahmacäri unmarried; gåhastha, married; vänaprastha, gradual rejection and
separation from marital arrangements; and sannyäsé, final rejection of all
worldly ties with family and social friends.

“A brahmacäré is unmarried; a gåhastha is married and living with his wife; a
vänaprastha is cultivating disinterest in family affairs and disassociating from
his spouse; and a sannyäsé has rejected material life. The sannyäsa äçrama is
certainly the most elevated of the four äçramas; and the brähmaëa varëa is the
best amongst the four varëas. The crest jewel of all scriptures, the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 11.17.15-21, states in this regard:

varëänäm äçramäëäà ca
janma-bhümy-anusäriëéù
äsan prakåtayo nènäà
nécair nécottamottamäù

“‘Corresponding to the specific part of the Universal Form of the Lord from
which the varëas and äçramas appeared, the respective high or low propensities
are formed accordingly. The feet and legs are of the lower anatomy, from which
the çüdra-varëa and gåhastha-äçrama are respectively produced; hence, the
çüdra-varëa and gåhastha-äçrama are afflicted with a lowly nature. The mouth and
head are of the upper anatomy, from which the brähmaëas and sannyäsés are
respectively produced; hence, they are of the highest nature within society.’

çamo damas tapaù çaucaà
santoñaù kñäntir ärjavam
mad-bhaktiç ca dayä satyaà
brahma-prakåtayas tv imäù

“‘Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, cleanliness, satisfaction, tolerance,
simple straightforwardness, devotion to Me, mercy, and truthfulness are the
natural qualities of the brähmaëas.’

tejo balaà dhåtiù çauryaà
titikñaudäryam udyamaù
sthairyaà brahmanyam aiçvaryaà
kñatra-prakåtayas tv imäù

“‘Dynamic power, bodily strength, determination, heroism, tolerance, generosity,
great endeavor, steadiness, devotion to the brähmaëas, and leadership are the
natural qualities of the kñatriyas.’

ästikyaà däna-niñöhä ca
adambho brahma-sevanam
atuñöir arthopacayair
vaiçya-prakåtayas tv imäù

“‘Faith in Vedic civilization, dedication to charity, freedom from hypocrisy,
service to the brähmaëas and perpetually desiring to accumulate more money are
the natural qualities of the vaiçyas.’

çuçrüñaëaà dvija-gaväà
devänäà cäpy amäyayä
tatra labdhena santoñaù
çüdra-prakåtayas tv imäù

“‘Service without duplicity to the brähmaëas, cows, devas and other worshipable
personalities, and complete satisfaction with whatever income is obtained in
such service are the natural qualities of the çüdras.’

açaucam anåtaà steyaà
nästikyaà çuñka-vigrahaù
kämaù krodhaç ca tarñaç ca
sa bhävo ’ntyävasäyinäm

“‘Uncleanliness, dishonesty, thievery, faithlessness, useless quarrel, lust,
anger, and hankering constitute the nature of those in the lowest position
outside the varëäçrama system.’

ahiàsä satyam asteyam
akäma-krodha-lobhatä
bhüta-priya-hitehä ca
dharmo ’yaà särva-varëikaù

“‘Nonviolence, truthfulness, honesty, desire for the happiness and welfare of
all others and freedom from lust, anger, and greed constitute duties for all
members of society.’

“I refrain from elaborating upon these çlokas, as I am in an august assembly of
devotees and all of you are able to comprehend their import. I simply want to
point out that the system of varëa and äçrama is the only foundation upon which
a civilized society may thrive and the basis for living according to scriptural
injunction. To the degree the varëäçrama system is not practiced in a country,
irreligiosity will be prominent there. 

“Let us now further analyse the usage of the two words, nitya and naimittika. A
deep probe into the essence of the scriptures reveals that the two words, nitya
and naimittika, when they relate to the performance of karma are never meant in
the päramärthika, purely spiritual sense, but are used in the vyävahärika
sense—terms to indicate the vaidhé discipline for everyday, routine, material
life.

“On the other hand, expressions such as: nitya-dharma, eternal religion;
nitya-karma, eternal, unmotivated spiritual duties; nitya-tattva, eternal
spiritual principle; and nitya-satya, eternal truth, are to be used only to
describe the living entity’s pure and transcendental state of consciousness and
should actually not be used for another purpose.

“Previously, the term nitya was used to denote a type of fruitive activity aimed
at giving someone in material life a taste and inclination for the absolute
transcendence and eternal life upon that plane. However, karma can never be
eternal. Only when by the process of karma-yoga, karma seeks to achieve jïana,
and jïana in turn is sublimated into bhakti, can karma and jïana be described as
nitya, but there also solely in an attributive, figurative sense. The brähmaëa’s
sandhyä-vandana has therefore been termed nitya-karma only because these
physical and psychical activities direct the living entity from a backward state
of conditioned consciousness to the pure devotion that is bhakti. 

“Since bhakti is the actual transcendental nitya-karma, a path starting from any
backward position that ultimately helps in progress towards bhakti may also be
called nitya, eternal, though actually, in itself, such a position is not
eternal. In a pedantic sense, it is therefore better to describe it as
naimittika, rather than nitya. In conclusion, therefore karma, including its two
divisions, nitya and naimittika, is merely a means and not an absolute
principle.

“Thus, an analysis on the basis of Vedic siddhänta, ultimate truth and
conclusion, establishes that the search for the absolute transcendental reality
is the living entity’s only nitya-dharma; and all other religions and
performances are naimittika. Varëäçrama-dharma; añtanga-yoga, the path of
eight-fold mystic yoga; säìkhya, speculative and deductive knowledge; and
tapasya, austerity, are all naimittika. If the living entity were not in a
conditioned state, encaged in matter, all these religious practices would be
redundant. The living entity’s conditioned state is thus actually the cause that
has created all these religious duties and lent credence to them. Therefore, in
fact, they are all naimittika-dharma.

“The brähmaëa’s superior status in society, the vandana prayers, and his final
graduation from fruitive work through the acceptance of sannyäsa are all
naimittika dharma. For the encouragement of those on the spiritual ladder, the
status of these religious practices has indeed been very eloquently eulogized in
the scriptures, yet in comparison to the genuine nitya-karma, unalloyed bhakti,
they maintain a humble position, as this verse from Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 7.9.10,
illustrates: 

vipräd dvi-ñaò-guëa-yutäd aravinda-näbha-
pädäravinda-vimukhät çvapacaà variñöham
manye tad-arpita-mano-vacanehitärtha-
präëaà punäti sa kulaà na tu bhürimänaù

“‘The twelve qualifications of a brähmaëa are as follows: truthfulness,
self-control, austerity, freedom from maliciousness, modesty, tolerance,
non-enviousness, expertise in conducting sacrifices, charity, patience,
studiousness, and strictness in observing religious vows. A brähmaëa of this
calibre is indeed worshipable anywhere in the world. However, if such a brähmaëa
is not a devotee and is averse to the lotus feet of the Lord, he is certainly
lower than a devotee from the lowest caëòäla, dog-eater, caste, who, possessing
devotion, has dedicated everything—mind, words, activities, wealth and life—to
the Supreme Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. Such a devotee is better than such a brähmaëa
because the devotee can purify his whole family, whereas the so-called brähmaëa
in a such position of false prestige cannot purify even himself.’

“The purport of this verse is that if a lowborn caëòäla first purifies himself
by associating with saintly souls and embraces the transcendental path of
devotional service to Çré Kåñëa, which is the living entity’s actual
nitya-karma, then he is far superior to a brähmaëa by birth who has rejected the
search for the Absolute Truth, Çré Kåñëa—which is the actual nitya-karma—and has
instead busied himself with materialistic naimittika-karma.

“We find two varieties of human beings in this world: udita-viveka, those with
spiritually awakened consciousness; and anudita-viveka, those with slumbering
consciousness. The latter are the majority in the world, while the first type is
very rare. Amongst the second type, the brähmaëas are certainly the most
advanced and the secondary nitya-karma prescribed for their caste, such as
sandhyä-vandana, is the foremost amongst all mundane religious practices. 

“Another name for a person with udita-viveka is Vaiñëava. The Vaiñëava
demeanour, therefore, is naturally quite different from those who belong to the
condition of anudita-viveka. Despite this difference, the Vaiñëavas do not
deprecate the secondary nitya-karma of other groups, because the Vaiñëavas
understand that the rules and regulations prescribed for the anudita-viveka are
meant for their beneficial discipline and eventual elevation. The essential
direction of all the scriptures is the same: Persons with anudita-viveka should
find themselves rigidly obedient to the simple, extraneous, and neophyte
instructions of the scriptures; whereas, persons with udita-viveka should seek
out and be attached to the deeper scriptural purports. 

“The rituals and the applications may differ, but the purport remains the same.
To the inexperienced eye of a layman of slumbering consciousness, the activities
of a person in awakened consciousness may seem contrary to the social norms, but
in essence, they are not. On the other hand, viewed from the position of
awakened consciousness, the instructions regarding naimittika-dharma may seem
appropriate for people in general, but ultimately they are incomplete, exoteric,
diluted, and evanescent.

“In actual practice, naimittika-dharma is devoid of direct, transcendental
activities. On the surface, the performer of naimittika-dharma may appear to be
acting on the transcendental platform, but actually, these instrumental mundane
duties merely provide the means for approaching the final transcendental goal.
Once the goal is attained, the performances of naimittika-dharma become
obsolete, being simply a segment of the path leading to the goal. Furthermore,
naimittika-dharma can never be the complete path; for example, the brähmaëa’s
sandhyä and vandana rituals are like his other religious duties: temporary
performances subject to stringent scriptural stipulations—they do not spring
from his innate natural spiritual activity. 

“At a later stage, having been purified by performing these prescribed duties
for a long time, if one is fortunate to come into sädhu-saìga, saintly
association, one develops a spiritual taste for the transcendental activity of
chanting harinäma. At this juncture, the duties of sandhyä-vandana are
superseded. However, sandhyä and vandana may contribute to absolute spiritual
dharma by elevating people to the point of accepting their prime duty—chanting
hari-näma. That is to say, chanting harinäma, in itself, the absolute
transcendental activity. Although naimittika-dharma is appreciated because it
shows the way to spiritual elevation, nevertheless, it is, in itself,
ineffective and adulterated, and only the absolute spiritual
principle—ultimately—is desirable and useful.

“Both matter itself and cohabiting with matter are undesirable for the living
entities. Naimittika-dharma is supported by a great variety of mundane
principles and results, which may keep the practitioners simply enthralled in
the mundane nature. For example, a brähmaëa’s worship of the Supreme Lord may be
very beneficial, but if he considers himself superior to all other living
entities, this spoils his worship and he then obtains detrimental results. 

“Similarly, the practices of the eightfold yoga system endow the yogi with
vibhüti, mystic power, a rather inferior, very inauspicious result for the
living entities. Bhukti, enjoyment, and mukti, salvation, are both inseparable
from naimittika-dharma, and both of which are only fit to be rejected by the
jéva. Therefore, naimittika-dharma contains a major portion of irrelevant
activities and their concomitant dangerous results for the living entities.

“Naimittika-dharma is impermanent. It cannot be practiced as an eternal religion
under all the different conditions the living entity has to undergo. The
specific religious duties of a brähmaëa, or the duties of statecraft of the
kñatriya, etc., are inevitably discarded with the termination of the immediate
cause and reason for one’s earthly duties, namely the body. After being born in
one life as a brähmaëa, a living entity may get a very low birth in his next
life as a caëòäla, dog-eater. Then, the naimittika-dharma as previously
prescribed for him in his birth as a brähmaëa is not acceptable as the
sva-dharma in his birth as a low class caëòäla. In this instance, the use of the
term sva-dharma is merely figurative, because in every new birth, the
conditioned soul assumes a new and temporary sva-dharma in accordance with the
body he has attained; whereas, the real sva-dharma is nitya-dharma and thus
remains constant from life to life.

“If I were to be questioned as to what vaiñëava-dharma is, my concise reply
would be: ‘It is the living entity’s nitya-dharma.’ In a liberated state, the
Vaiñëava devotee engages in the transcendental activity of unalloyed devotional
service, kåñëa-prema, in pure Kåñëa consciousness. Even while still in a
conditioned state and under the influence of material nature, the Vaiñëava
devotee maintains his udita-viveka, awakened consciousness, and pursues
transcendental devotional service. Acting in the material world, he accepts
everything that is conducive to spiritual activity and rejects everything that
is detrimental. His actions are not hampered by superfluous scriptural
stipulations, the do’s and don’ts. He appreciates and executes any scriptural
regulation that enhances his Kåñëa consciousness. Nevertheless, if such
regulations are detrimental to his spiritual progress, then he discards them.
Thus, the Vaiñëava devotees are the jewels of the earth. They are everyone’s
well-wishing friends and bring good fortune to this world. I beg humbly to offer
these points for consideration to this august assembly of Vaiñëavas. Also,
kindly forgive me for my mistakes.”

Vaiñëava däsa offered his prostrated obeisances to the gathering of devotees and
then sat down quietly to one side. His dissertation had had an astounding impact
upon the gathering of Vaiñëavas, who were moved to profuse tears and spontaneous
praise of Vaiñëava däsa, the whole village reverberating with the sounds of
eulogy to him.

The inquisitive brähmaëa singer tacitly acknowledged the esoteric truths
contained in the talk of Vaiñëava däsa. Of course, some of the arguments had met
with doubts in his mind, but the seed of faith in vaiñëava-dharma was now lodged
deeper than before in his heart. Standing with folded hands, he spoke out, “Dear
respected audience, not claiming to be a Vaiñëava, I am nonetheless becoming a
Vaiñëava by constantly hearing harinäma. If all of you were to kindly enlighten
me with your valuable instructions, then that would dissipate the many doubts
still clouding my mind.”

Çré Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé, feeling compassion for the brähmaëa, replied,
“Please try to associate with Vaiñëava däsa as often as possible. He is erudite
in all branches of the Vedic scriptures. After embracing the renounced order of
sannyäsa, he lived in Väräëasé. Then our most beloved Lord, Çré Kåñëa Caitanya,
out of His causeless mercy, attracted him to come to Navadvépa-dhäma. After
diligently tutoring himself in the Vaiñëava philosophy, he is now fully
conversant, and has developed deep attachment and love for chanting harinäma.” 

Upon hearing Bäbäjé Mahäräja’s instructions, the brähmaëa inquirer, Çré Kälidäsa
Lähiré, decided to accept Vaiñëava däsa as his guru, thinking, “A brähmaëa by
birth, he has taken up the renounced order of life and is therefore certainly
eligible to instruct another brähmaëa. Furthermore, he has proven himself to be
well versed in Vaiñëava philosophical conclusions. I can learn a lot about
Vaiñëavism from him.” He thus approached Vaiñëava däsa, prostrating himself at
his feet, and said, “My dear respected sir, kindly shower your grace upon me.”
Vaiñëava däsa reciprocated by offering prostrated obeisances to Lähiré Mahäçaya
and replied, “I would remain always grateful to you, if you were to look upon me
with compassion.” With the growing purple haze upon the horizon announcing the
end of the day, the assembly stood up and dispersed to their individual
dwellings.

Lähiré Mahäçaya lived in a hut surrounded by greeneries. It was in a residential
locality, but a little hidden from inquisitive eyes, the whole area being
fenced-off by strong bamboo strips. The small courtyard in front of his hut was
taken up by a small bower of mädhavé flower-creepers and a miniature platform
for the Tulasé devé plant. On either side of the courtyard stood two rooms. A
néma tree sapling, a healthy hedge of mogra flowers, and other fruit and flower
trees here and there lent an unassuming splendour to this quiet niche.

Mädhava däsa Bäbäjé was the owner. Initially, this bäbäjé had been very strict
in his devotional practices, but later, as a result of bad association, he had
deviated from the path of Vaiñëavism. Intimate relationship with a woman had
contaminated his devotional mood and curtailed his devotional practice. Being
impoverished, he had found it difficult to make ends meet and now went out
begging. He had also let one of his rooms and thus Lähiré Mahäçaya was presently
his tenant.

Late that night, Lähiré Mahäçaya awoke abruptly. While lying awake, within his
mind he reviewed Vaiñëava däsa’s exposition, trying to extract the essence.
However, suddenly his attention was arrested by a slight stirring outside; he
peered into the courtyard and saw Mädhava däsa Bäbäjé talking with a woman. She
apparently noticed Lähiré’s presence and silently slipped away into the dark.
Mädhava däsa Bäbäjé then came and stood quietly in front of Lähiré Mahäçaya,
hanging his head in shame.

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “What is this, Bäbäjé?”

With tear-streaked cheeks, Mädhava däsa Bäbäjé replied, “My disastrous fate!
What can I say! Alas! What I was before and just look at me now! Paramahaàsa
Premadäsa Bäbäjé used to respect me so much! But now I am too ashamed to meet
him.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya gently prodded, “Why don’t you explain everything a little more
clearly, so we can understand your problem.”

Mädhava däsa replied, “The woman you just saw was my wife before I took to the
renounced life. After I received initiation and left home, she soon took up
residence in a hut on the bank of the Gaìgä in Çrépäö Çäntipura. A long time
passed without incident. However, once I accidentally met her on a trip to
Çäntipura and asked her why she had renounced home and family life. She tried to
explain that she had grown disinterested in family life after being deprived of
service to me, her former husband. Therefore, she had decided to reside in a
holy place, learn about spirituality, and maintain her life by begging. 

“I immediately returned to Godruma without further comment. After a while, she
also moved to Godruma, taking up residence in the house of a pious milkman. My
troubles began when, almost daily, I would run into her somewhere. The more I
tried to avoid her, the more she intensified her intimacy with me. She has now
built an äçrama near here. Every night, she is waiting until late and then
visiting me, meticulously bringing about my downfall. I have become infamous
everywhere and my spiritual progress has been severely reversed. I am the black
sheep amongst the followers of Çré Caitanya. After the incident with Choöa
Haridäsa, I am the next to be condemned as a contemptible culprit. Bäbäjé’s
sober society has so far not chastised me, but they no longer have any respect
for me.” 

After giving him a patient hearing, Lähiré Mahäçaya cautioned, “Mädhava däsa
Bäbäjé, you must be very careful!”

Both then retired to their respective rooms for the rest of the night. His mind
swarming with thoughts, for Lähiré Mahäçaya sleep was elusive. He concluded that
Mädhava däsa Bäbäjé had become a väntäçé, one who eats his own vomit by
returning to the family life he had renounced, and was now sliding further down
to depravity. Therefore, it was not advisable to remain here, not so much
because of the bad association, which could be avoided, but because his own
reputation could be tarnished. The saintly Vaiñëavas would perhaps lose respect
and no longer instruct him.

In the morning, Lähiré Mahäçaya went to see Çré Vaiñëava däsa in
Pradyumna-Kuïja. After greeting him respectfully, he requested a small living
space for himself. Vaiñëava däsa approached Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé with
this request and Lähiré was granted permission to stay in one of the outlying
huts, and his daily meals were arranged with a nearby brähmaëa family.

Thus ends the Third Chapter of the Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Naimittika-dharma:
Impermanent Religious Duties Are Incomplete, Pedestrian, Impure and Evanescent

JDH 4: The Nitya-dharma Is Vaiñëavism

Chapter Four
The Nitya-dharma Is Vaiñëavism

The kuöéra, cottage, given to Lähiré Mahäçaya was next door to that of Çré
Vaiñëava däsa. A number of mango and jackfruit trees stood around nearby and
small flowering betel plants beautifully decorated the surroundings. Outside the
kuöéra in the centre of the courtyard was a large circular platform, a sacred
monument from the time when Çré Pradyumna Brahmacäri had first taken up
residence here. Vaiñëavas had been circumambulating and offering prostrated
obeisances to this platform, affectionately named Çré Surabhé-cabutarä, for
many, many years.

Shortly after dusk as the darkness of night gradually deepened, Vaiñëava däsa
was sitting upon a straw mat inside his kuöéra, chanting harinäma. The fortnight
of the waning moon held sway and from the nearby kuöéra of Lähiré Mahäçaya, a
flickering lamp feebly probed the black shadows of the courtyard outside. Seeing
a dark and shining snake-like object, lying coiled in front of the door of
Vaiñëava däsa, Lähiré Mahäçaya jumped up in a flash and armed himself with a
strong stick. Brightening the flame, he picked up his lamp, ready to move upon
the snake. However, by the time he had stepped outside, the snake had already
disappeared. From the doorway, Lähiré Mahäçaya whispered a caution to Vaiñëava
däsa, “Please be very careful, a snake may have just entered your hut.”

Vaiñëava däsa replied placidly, “Lähiré Mahäçaya, why do you bother about
snakes? Kindly come inside and sit down without fear.” Hesitatingly, Lähiré
stepped inside and sat down upon the mat, but he could not calm his mind, saying
at last, “In this respect our Çäntipura is far better; it is a township, so
there is no danger of snakes. Nadia is infested with snakes, especially here in
Godruma, where the woods are all around, making it slightly inconvenient for us
urbanized folks.”

Çré Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé placated him, saying, “Lähiré Mahäçaya, is it
absolutely necessary to agitate your mind with such trivialities? You must have
heard of the Parékñit Mahäräja episode from Çrémad-Bhägavatam: Parékñit Mahäräja
totally ignored the threat of impending death from snakebite. With a placid
mind, he absorbed himself in the nectarean pastimes of Çré Kåñëa as narrated by
the great devotee, Çréla Sukadeva Gosvämé, thus attaining divine bliss. Snakes
cannot reach the spiritual body of the living entity, what to speak of biting
it. Furthermore, the snakebite of separation from the topics of Kåñëa
consciousness causes the greatest harm to the body!

“This material body is impermanent and will surely have to be discarded one day.
Physical labour is the only thing preordained for this material tabernacle.
When, by Kåñëa’s will, this body decays, nothing can save it, but as long as the
body is not destined to die, it cannot be harmed even while sleeping next to a
snake. Therefore, one of the symptoms of a Vaiñëava is that he is freed from the
fear of snakebite and the like. If you are constantly distressed by such
imagined forebodings, how will you dovetail your love towards the lotus feet of
the Supreme Lord? Simply abandon your fear of snakes and the attempt to kill the
one that you just saw.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya spoke with deference, “Respected Sir, your words of wisdom have
driven all fears out of my heart. I now know that only when I elevate my heart
and thoughts can I become eligible for self-realization. Those great sages who
dwell in caves and meditate upon the Supreme Lord in loving devotion are not
afraid of wild beasts. They peacefully coexist with even the fiercest forest
creatures, but nonetheless are greatly afraid of association with worldly-minded
people.”

Çré Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé continued, “When Bhaktidevé, the goddess of pure
devotional service, enters the heart, the jéva automatically becomes elevated,
making him dear to all living entities of the world. A pure devotee is always
loved and revered by saints and worldly-minded people alike. Therefore, a man
must strive to become a Vaiñëava.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya immediately replied, “Sir, you have evoked a strong faith in me
for nitya-dharma, and you have convinced me of the many similarities existing
between nitya-dharma and vaiñëava-dharma. Nevertheless, somehow or other, I am
still in doubt about the exact equivalence of vaiñëava-dharma with nitya-dharma.
I beg you to kindly explain these principles to me more exhaustively.”

Çré Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé began to speak, “In the name of vaiñëava-dharma two
separate dharmas are practiced in the world: the çuddha-vaiñëava-dharma, pure
and proper; and the distorted, viddha-vaiñëava-dharma. The
çuddha-vaiñëava-dharma is a singular spiritual principle, but is divided into
four sections according to the different rasas, devotional mellows: däsya,
servitorship; sakhya, friendship; vätsalya, parenthood; and mädhurya,
conjugality. Indeed, çuddha-vaiñëava-dharma is one without a second and is
further known as nitya-dharma, or also as parama-dharma, the supreme function. 

“In the Muëòaka Upaniñad, 1.1.3, we find: 

vijïäte sarvam idaà vijïätaà bhavati 

“‘By realizing Him in truth, everything becomes known.’ 

“This aphorism factually describes çuddha-vaiñëava-dharma, which will be
revealed to you gradually.

“Viddha-vaiñëava-dharma, impure vaiñëava-dharma, is of two varieties:
karma-viddha-vaiñëava-dharma, polluted by fruitive work; and
jïana-viddha-vaiñëava-dharma, contaminated by empirical knowledge. The practices
of the orthodox brähmaëas, known as smärtas, wherein there is a stress on rules,
rituals, and methodology in the performance of vaiñëava-dharma, are to be known
as karma-viddha-vaiñëava-dharma. In this branch of vaiñëava-dharma, one is
initiated with vaiñëava-mantra, but one worships the all-pervading Lord of the
Universe, Çré Viñëu, only as a component of the process of karma. Although Çré
Viñëu is actually the supreme independent controller of the devas, the smärta
philosophy proposes that, He is nothing more than a constituent part of the
rituals of karma-käëòa and is Himself subject to the results of such fruitive,
ritualistic performance. In other words, Çré Viñëu is under the influence of
karma, rather than the law of karma being dependent upon the supreme will of Çré
Viñëu.

“Further, they claim that upäsanä, the process of worship, bhakti, devotional
surrender, and sädhana, spiritual practices, are all different rituals
ultimately consisting of karma, because the law of karma is the highest
principle, unsurpassable by any other. The mémäàsaka, materialistic philosophers
and logicians, have practiced this brand of Vaiñëavism from time immemorial. In
India, such philosophers often arrogantly declare themselves Vaiñëavas, not
acknowledging the sincere followers of çuddha-vaiñëava-dharma as the actual
Vaiñëavas. Certainly, this is their misfortune.

“Jïäna-viddha-vaiñëava-dharma is also very widespread in India. In the opinion
of these empiricists, Brahman, the incomprehensible, all-pervading Absolute
Truth, is the highest philosophical principle. They say that in order to attain
impersonal Brahman realization one must worship the personal forms of Sürya, the
sun god; Gaëeça, the remover of obstacles; Çakti, the goddess of the material
nature; Lord Çiva; and Çré Viñëu in the process known as païcopäsanä, the
worship of the five deities. One is to discard the worship of these personal
forms upon acquiring full jïana, realization, which occurs upon the final
achievement of impersonal Brahman realization. Similarly, many followers of this
philosophy deride the actual pure Vaiñëavas. Their worship of Çré Viñëu,
initiation into viñëu-mantra, and other rituals pertaining to Çré Viñëu, may
sometimes include the worship of Çré Çré Rädhä Kåñëa, but still it can never be
categorized as çuddha-vaiñëava-dharma.

“If these varieties of viddha-vaiñëava-dharma are separated from the
vaiñëava-dharma, then çuddha-vaiñëava-dharma remains, which is the real
vaiñëava-dharma. However, as a result of the ill influence of Kali-yuga, many
people cannot understand çuddha-vaiñëava-dharma and mistake
viddha-vaiñëava-dharma for real vaiñëava-dharma.

“From the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 1.2.11, the conclusion can be drawn that the
spiritual quest of man branches into three directions: brahman-pravåtti, the
impersonal Brahman; paramätmä-pravåtti, the all-pervasive Supersoul; and
bhagavän-pravåtti, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

“Some persons, with a pravåtti, inclination, towards the Brahman, veer towards
impersonal realization and embrace the path of païcopäsanä to achieve their
goal. Jïana-viddha-vaiñëava-dharma is born out of this practice. Whilst
worshiping Paramätmä, some are attracted to pursuing the eightfold path of
mystic yoga and meditation upon the Supersoul within the heart. This philosophy
propagates the belief that Çré Viñëu, initiation into viñëu-mantra, and
meditation are all part of the rituals of karma. Karma-viddhi-vaiñëava-dharma
arises out of this philosophy.

“Followers of bhägavata-pravåtti, on the other hand, are the fortunate jévas who
develop an attraction for unalloyed devotion to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Their worship of the Supreme Lord is not a part of the process of
either karma or jïana, but of the principle of çuddha-bhakti, pure devotion.
This philosophy is the real vaiñëava-dharma, known as çuddha-vaiñëava-dharma. As
stated in the Çrémad Bhägavatam, 1.2.11:

vädanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvaà yaj jïänam advayam
brahmeti paramätmeti
bhagavän iti çabdyate 

“‘Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this non-dual
substance Brahman, Paramätmä, or Bhagavän.’

“Please observe that the bhägavata principle, surpassing and inclusive of both
Brahman and Paramätmä, is the highest principle. This bhägavata principle is the
personal conception of the Absolute Truth and is thus the pure viñëu-tattva, the
highest category of pure transcendence. The followers of this principle are
pure, rare souls and their nature is inclined towards bhakti. Some of the
numerous names of hari-bhakti, devotion to Çré Hari, are çuddha-vaiñëava-dharma;
nitya dharma, the eternal function; jaiva-dharma, the eternal religion of the
pure soul; bhägavata-dharma, worship of the Supreme Person; paramärtha-dharma,
religion that leads to the highest realization; and parama-dharma, the supreme
function. 

“All the religious rites and activities emanating from both the Brahman nature
and the Paramätmä nature are defined as naimittika. The search for the
impersonal Brahman realization is motivated by material desire; hence, it is
naimittika, not eternal. A person upon realising his suffering in the material
conditioned state becomes eager to sever his bondage. Thus, his struggle against
the misery of material bondage is the motive to take up the path of impersonal
realization wherein all such distressful material qualities are extinguished.
This striving is said to be naimittika, as it is impelled by a nimitta, material
cause, in this case material bondage. Thus, it is not an eternal path. 

“The jévas, who desire the subtle enjoyment and bliss of samädhi in
paramätmä-dharma, total meditative absorption in the Paramätmä, embrace the
process of naimittika-dharma, materially motivated by the desire to attain this
subtle happiness. Therefore, even the tendency towards paramätmä-dharma is
motivated by selfish material desire and is thus also temporal, leaving only
unalloyed bhägavata-dharma as the sole eternal dharma.”

Having listened patiently to the words of Vaiñëava däsa, Lähiré Mahäçaya then
said, “Dear master! Kindly explain to me the nature of pure Vaiñëavism. Rather
late in my life, I am receiving spiritual guidance from someone who has kindly
accepted me under the shelter of his lotus feet. I have heard that after having
taken initiation from an unqualified person, an aspirant must again accept
spiritual initiation and scriptural instructions, but this time from a bona fide
spiritual master. For the past few days, I have taken to heart your delineation
of scriptural conclusions; they have given me faith in the Vaiñëava thought.
Therefore, out of compassion for me, first kindly instruct me in Vaiñëava theism
and then initiate me into the Vaiñëava fold, thus purifying me.”

A trifle unsettled by this statement, Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé said, “Dear Sir, I
will indeed try to teach you everything within the scope of my realization, but
I am not eligible to become a dékçä-guru, initiating spiritual master. However,
for now, just school yourself in the pure Vaiñëava theology. The original and
primeval spiritual preceptor of the universe, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, has
declared that Vaiñëava theology has three fundamental principles: sambandha,
relationships; abhidheya, the means of attainment; and prayojana, the prime
necessity and goal. One who has not just understood theoretically, but has also
practically realized this knowledge and who thus disciplines his life
accordingly is a pure Vaiñëava, an unalloyed devotee of the Lord.

“The sambandha tattva, the inter-relational principle, has three main aspects:
(1) jaòa-jagat, the material creation, and mäyä, the illusory energy; (2) the
jéva soul, the servitor and controlled; and (3) Éçvara, the Supreme Controller,
the Personality of Godhead.

“The Supreme Lord is one and unsurpassable; omnipotent; all attractive; the only
abode of unlimited aiçvarya, opulence, and madhura, sweet tenderness; and the
only shelter for both the jéva-çakti and the mäyä-çakti, the external potency of
the Lord. Although He is simultaneously the shelter and the ultimate source of
both the jéva-çakti and the mäyä-çakti, He marvellously maintains His unique and
fully independent status.

“The Lord’s bodily effulgence, known as the brahma-jyotir, radiates unlimitedly
from Him and manifests as the impersonal Brahman. By His divine powers, He has
produced the material cosmos and the jévas. He is represented by and controls
His creation by His partial expansion as Paramätmä. In the section of the
paravyoma, spiritual sky, known as Vaikuëöha, where His aiçvarya, opulence,
predominates, He presides as Çré Näräyaëa. While in Goloka Våndävana, His
madhura, sweetness, potency is pre-eminent, which He relishes as Çré
Gopéjana-vallabha, the lover of the gopés, the cowherd damsels, as the
all-attractive Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëacandra.

“The Lord’s expansions, such as His prakäça, identical manifestations, and
viläsa, pastime forms, are eternal and unlimited. Nobody and nothing can even
approximate to Him in any feature, what to speak of surpassing Him. All His
different manifestations and pastimes are a result of His parä-çakti, supreme
divine power. The vikrama, potency, of this parä-çakti is displayed in
innumerable variegated manifestations of which, the jéva is introduced to three:
(1) the cid-vikrama, spiritual potency, by which all of the Lord’s léläs,
pastimes, are directly produced; (2) the taöasthä-vikrama, the marginal jéva
potency, by which the jéva is created and maintained; and (3) the mäyä-vikrama,
the illusory potency, the external energy which manifests the mundane universes,
material time, and material fruitive activity. 

“Thus, sambandha-tattva is comprised of these three relationships: (1) between
the Supreme Lord and the jéva; (2) between the Supreme Lord and material nature;
and (3) between the jéva and material nature. Complete comprehension of these
truths leads to sambandha-jïana, transcendental knowledge. One cannot become a
true and pure Vaiñëava without this knowledge.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya further enquired, “I have heard it said about the Vaiñëavas that
they are controlled by feelings and emotions and that they have no need for
knowledge. How may this statement be best explained? While I was carefully
tuning my feelings in chanting harinäma, I never cared for sambandha-jïana.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé replied, “Cultivating and seasoning bhäva, spiritual
emotion, to the ultimate stage is indeed the highest goal of a Vaiñëava, but the
emotion must be pure and transcendental. Those who consider the impersonal
Brahman as the final destination and try to develop bhäva in the course of
achieving Brahman are far off the mark. Their bhäva and spiritual endeavours are
impure, merely false representations of real bhäva. A miniscule drop of pure
bhäva brings spiritual perfection to the jéva, but mundane
sentimentalism—further poisoned by empirical knowledge—introduces chronic chaos
into the spiritual pursuit of the jéva. He who nurtures in his heart the
monistic path of Brahman realization is merely deceiving the world with his
postured attempts at bhakti and bhakti-bhäva, devotional emotion. Therefore, the
cultivation of sambandha-jïana is imperative for Vaiñëava devotees.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya spoke in an awed voice, “Is there any truth higher than Brahman?
If the Supreme Godhead is the cause of Brahman, why do the empirical
philosophers not discard their search for the Brahman and take up devotional
service to Bhagavän, the Personality of Godhead?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé laughed shortly and replied, “Be they be either Lord
Brahmä, the four Kumäras, Çukadeva Gosvämé, Çré Närada Muni or Lord Çiva—all
these spiritual aspirants have ultimately sought the supreme sanctuary of the
lotus feet of Çré Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.” 

Trying to fathom the subject more deeply, Lähiré Mahäçaya asked, “If Bhagavän is
endowed with a form this presupposes spatial limitations, how then could
Bhagavän be the source and superior to the unlimited, all-pervasive Brahman?”

Bäbäjé Mahäräja replied, “Even one of the mundane ingredients of this material
creation, called äkäça, space, is practically unlimited. Is then the unlimited
äkäça superior to Bhagavän? Actually, Çré Bhagavän is also limitless by virtue
of His infinite potency, one aspect of which is the Brahman, which is manifested
as His bodily lustre and is infinite and omnipresent. However, simultaneously,
Bhagavän accepts a definite form. Have you ever experienced any entity of
parallel potency? 

“By this unparelled, unsurpassable nature, Bhagavän is superior to the Brahman
concept. Bhagavän personifies a wonderful, all-attractive, personal quality,
which is complimented by His omnipresence, omniscience, and omnipotence.
Bhagavän manifests boundless compassion and is the source of paramount bliss to
the absolute degree. Furthermore, is not such a clearly defined personal
identity ideal? Would you prefer an entity that possesses neither
characteristics, nor potencies, and simply has an impersonal, omnipresent
existence?

“In truth, the Brahman is the impersonal manifestation of Bhagavän. Both the
personal and the impersonal aspects of Bhagavän exist harmoniously and
simultaneously. Brahman is but a fractional manifestation of Bhagavän, but
philosophically myopic persons are overwhelmed by this formless, tasteless,
impersonal, inscrutable, endless aspect of the Absolute Truth. Farsighted
persons demand the full vista and are not satisfied with anything less than the
complete whole, the entirety of the Absolute Truth. The Vaiñëavas are not
impressed by this impersonal concept, because it is contrary to the eternal
theistic principle and to the edicts of prema. Bhagavän Çré Kåñëa is the source
and shelter of both the personal and impersonal concepts. He is the shoreless
ocean of sublime joy, drawing close to Himself all pure souls.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “Çré Kåñëa took birth, grew up, performed activities, and
finally relinquished His body, how then can His form be eternal?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Çré Kåñëa’s body is sat, eternal; cit, fully cognizant;
and änanda, absolutely blissful. Without connection to mundane energy, Kåñëa’s
form does not experience material birth, activities, death, and so on.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “Why then are there contrary descriptions in the Mahäbhärata
and other scriptures?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “The transcendental, Absolute Truth is beyond words and
descriptions. The advanced self-realized souls behold the form of Çré Kåñëa and
His pastimes on the screen of their pure consciousness, but when this
transcendental perception is expressed in words it automatically degenerates
into mundane historical facts for those in the grips of mundane consciousness.
Those readers who are able to extract the transcendental essence from scriptures
like the Mahäbhärata will perceive Çré Kåñëa’s pastimes as spiritual. However,
people of gross intelligence will view them as mundane.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “When meditating upon Çré Kåñëa’s form I get the feeling in my
heart as if I were bound by time and space. Is there any method of meditation
upon the Lord that can overcome this feeling?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Meditation is an activity of the mind. As long as the
mind is not on the pure spiritual plane, meditation cannot touch the divine.
However, when the consciousness is imbued with bhakti, gradually the mind
becomes spiritualised, at which point meditation is naturally transcendental.
Vaiñëavas who relish the bliss of serving Kåñëa and chanting harinäma cannot be
influenced by the material energy. They attain the supramundane state and are
transported to the spiritual realm, where they meditate upon the daily
activities of the Lord and enjoy rendering intimate service to Him in
meditation.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “Please be merciful and give me a taste of that transcendental
experience.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “First, you must drive away all mental speculations and
materialistic concepts. Then, when you begin to chant harinäma incessantly, very
soon spiritual perception will awaken in your heart. The more you engage in
debates and arguments, the more the mind will be entangled in gross profanities.
However, if greater endeavour is made to increase the taste for chanting,
material inebriety will decrease and transcendence will seep into the heart.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “Kindly describe this spiritual experience in detail—this is my
earnest desire.” 

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “If the mind is unable to experience spiritual
consciousness through words and discussion, it shies away in doubt. However, the
spiritual platform can be attained only by the sincere application of the
transcendental process—the culture of cid-änanda, spiritual bliss. Curb all
argumentation and chant harinäma continuously for a few days, then you will find
that all doubts have been dissipated and all questions have ceased by the power
of the mantra.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “I have now understood that if one develops faith in Çré Kåñëa
and tastes the nectar of harinäma, one attains the supreme destination. I will
thoroughly learn about sambandha-jïana and take full shelter of harinäma.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Wonderful! Yes, study sambandha-jïana properly.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “I feel I have understood the truth about the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Bhagavän. Bhagavän is the one and only Highest Truth.
Brahman and Paramätmä are subordinate to Him. He is omnipresent, yet He resides
in the spiritual world with a wonderful spiritual form. He is the embodiment of
eternality, absolute knowledge, and unlimited bliss and is the fountainhead of
all energies. Although He is the self-satisfied controller of all potencies, He
is driven by the urge for exhilaration in the company of His hlädiné-çakti,
pleasure potency. May I request you to kindly tell me about jéva-tattva, the
principle of the individual souls.”

Vaiñëava däsa, “Çré Kåñëa possesses countless potencies of which the
taöasthä-çakti, marginal energy, is one. This energy is located in the buffer
region between the spiritual sky and the material nature and enjoys the facility
of close communication with both. The jéva-tattva is produced from this
taöasthä-çakti. The form of the jéva is cit-paramäëu, an infinitesimal particle
of spiritual energy. The miniscule form of the individual jéva makes him
vulnerable to the sway of the jaòa-jagat, material energy. Simultaneously
however, because of his innate spiritual constitution, even with a slight
spiritual support the jéva can become an eternal resident of the transcendental
abode of the Lord and experience supreme joy. 

“There are two kinds of jévas: mukta, liberated; and baddha, materially
conditioned. The mukta-jévas are eternal citizens of the spiritual world, and
the baddha-jévas are imprisoned in the material world. The conditioned jévas are
again two-fold: udita-viveka, those with awakened consciousness; anudita-viveka,
and those with unawakened consciousness. Human beings that have no aspiration
for self-realization belong, along with the entire animal kingdom, etc., to the
category of anudita-viveka and as a result are materially conditioned. However,
those jévas that have embraced the path of Vaiñëavism possess udita-viveka.

“Besides the Vaiñëavas, no one is genuinely interested in attaining the supreme
spiritual goal. Hence, the scriptures declare that service to and association
with Vaiñëavas is by far superior to any other activity. Implicit faith in the
scriptures inspires the udita-viveka to relish the chanting of harinäma, which
then creates an eagerness to associate with and serve the Vaiñëavas. The jévas
with anudita-viveka have not yet developed enough faith in the scriptures to
take up the chanting of harinäma. Their religious activities are restricted, at
best, to worshiping the Deity form of the Lord in conformity with previously
established family traditions and rules; therefore, their hearts lack the
religious sentiment required to serve and associate with Vaiñëavas.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “Master, I have grasped kåñëa-tattva, the truth about the
Supreme Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, and have also understood jéva-tattva. Kindly
elaborate upon mäyä-tattva, the principle of the illusory material creation.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Mäyä, the illusory material energy, is unique among the
energies of Çré Kåñëa. This potency is also designated as the aparä-çakti,
inferior potency, and further as the bahiraìgä-çakti, the external potency.
Darkness is always far away from the light; similarly, mäyä remains at a good
distance from Çré Kåñëa and His devotees. The mäyä-çakti has created this
material world with its fourteen planetary systems and the material ingredients
of earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence, and the mundane mistaken
identification with the material body known as ahaìkära, false ego. The gross
and subtle bodies of the conditioned jéva are both products of the mäyä-çakti,
but liberation removes this material contamination that covers the spiritual
identity of the jéva. 

“As deep as the jéva is in the clutches of mäyä, to the same extent he is also
alienated from Çré Kåñëa. To the degree he has shrugged off the mantle of
servitorship to mäyä, he can advance towards the lotus feet of Çré Kåñëa. The
material world has come into existence by the desire of Kåñëa to assist the jéva
in his attempt to exploit and enjoy mäyä. However, this mundane universe is not
a permanent residence for the jéva but merely a prison-house lodging him
temporarily.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “O master! Kindly enlighten me on the eternal relationships
between mäyä, jéva, and Çré Kåñëa.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “The jéva is a minute spiritual spark; hence, he is
eternally a servant of Çré Kåñëa. The material nature acts as a dungeon wherein
he is held captive; however, whilst imprisoned he can also take advantage of
saintly association to help him begin the process of chanting harinäma. Then,
gradually, by the mercy of Çré Kåñëa, he becomes situated his svarüpa, eternally
perfected spiritual identity, and relishes the sweet nectar of devotional
service to the Lord in His transcendental abode. This is the confidential truth
about the eternal relationship between these three principles. How can one
actually engage in pure devotion without this knowledge?”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “If knowledge is acquired through education and study, is it
imperative to first become a scholar before one becomes a Vaiñëava?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “To be a Vaiñëava, neither formal education, nor fluency
in a particular language is necessary, but it is essential for the jéva to
eradicate the nescience of material illusion. This can only be accomplished when
he takes complete shelter of the lotus feet of a bona fide spiritual master who
is a pure Vaiñëava saint and who infuses the heart of the disciple with the
knowledge of sambandha-tattva through his teachings and exemplary actions. This
is the correct explanation of dékçä, initiation, and çikñä, spiritual
instruction.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “What follows dékçä and çikñä?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “One must cultivate an ideal moral character and practice
Kåñëa consciousness. This stage of development is known as abhidheya-tattva, the
process by which one achieves the ultimate desired goal, kåñëa-prema. The Vedas
and all corollary scriptures, have repeatedly stressed the importance of this
endeavour for self-realization; and hence Çré Caitanya has termed this endeavour
the abhidheya-tattva, that which needs to be done.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, his eyes brimming with tears, continued, “O master! I will take
shelter of your lotus feet. Your wonderful instructions have made me grasp the
knowledge of sambandha-tattva. Concurrent with this process of learning and by
your mercy, my previous misconceptions have gradually disappeared. Now kindly
teach me the abhidheya-tattva.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Now at last, you can stop worrying! Your humble attitude
is a sure indication that Çré Caitanya has blessed you. For the captive jéva in
the material world, sädhu-saìga, saintly association, is the only recourse. The
guru and saintly Vaiñëavas instruct people about the science of self-realization
out of their inherently compassionate nature. By carrying out this science of
devotional service, the sädhaka, aspirant, gradually approaches the sädhya,
ultimate realization of the essential truth. Devotional service to the Supreme
Lord, Çré Hari, is the only abhidheya, means, to achieve that ultimate goal.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “What must one do to serve the Supreme Lord, Çré Hari, thus
engaging in hari-bhajana?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Hari-bhajana means to engage in bhakti. Bhakti is divided
into three stages: sädhana, the stage of practice; bhäva, the first awakening of
divine emotion; and prema, the mature state of transcendental love. One must
practice sädhana-bhakti in the beginning, which then leads one to the stage of
bhäva-bhakti. When bhäva-bhakti matures to kåñëa-prema, it is known as
prema-bhakti.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “Please elaborate upon the form and application
sädhana-bhakti.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has extensively researched this
subject in his book, Çré Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, which I will now try to
summarize as succinctly as possible. Sädhana-bhakti has nine limbs, as
enumerated in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 7.5.23: 

çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù 
smaraëaà päda-sevanam
arcanaà vandanaà däsyaà 
sakhyam ätmä-nivedanam

“‘Prahläda Mahäräja said, “Hearing, chanting, and remembering about the
transcendental names, forms, qualities, paraphernalia and pastimes of Çré Viñëu;
serving the lotus feet of the Lord; worshipping the Lord; offering prayers and
obeisances to the Lord; becoming His servant; considering the Lord one’s best
friend; and surrendering everything to Him—in other words serving Him completely
with body, mind, and words—constitutes pure devotional service.’

“Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has further divided these nine limbs into branches and
sub-branches, arriving at a total of sixty-four practices. An important fact
about sädhana-bhakti is that it has two divisions: vaidhé-bhakti, directed by
the rules and regulations of scripture; and rägänuga-bhakti, impelled by
spontaneous attraction. Vaidhé-bhakti has the nine limbs aforementioned. In
rägänuga-bhakti, one must surrender to the guidance of a vrajaväsé, an eternal
associate of Kåñëa in transcendental Vraja, and thus serve Kåñëa internally,
imbued with the devotional mood of that vrajaväsé. The level of devotion of an
aspirant will decide his adhikära, eligibility, to practice one form or the
other of sädhana-bhakti.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “Gurudeva, what are the criteria for determining the adhikära
to perform sädhana-bhakti?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “The guru judges the ability of a sincere neophyte to
adhere to scriptural rules and regulations. Accordingly, he initiates him into
the process of vaidhé-sädhana-bhakti. If and when the neophyte is inclined
towards rägänuga-bhakti, then the guru guides him on the esoteric path of
bhajana in rägänuga-bhakti.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “How does one discern the levels of adhikära, Gurudeva?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “A neophyte who neither possesses a purified intellect,
nor the ability to grasp the philosophical precepts of rägänuga-bhakti, but is
nevertheless attracted to Deity worship and following the scriptural injunctions
is eligible for vaidhé-bhakti. Whereas, someone who desires to worship and serve
the Supreme Lord without having to overtly depend on scriptural stipulations and
whose heart is naturally drawn to hari-bhajana is a fit candidate for
rägänuga-bhakti.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “Revered master! Kindly ascertain my level of adhikära, so that
I may understand this principle. I am as of yet unable to comprehend precisely
the two concepts of vaidhé-bhakti and rägänuga-bhakti.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “You have but to test your own heart to know your level.
Do you firmly believe that—without strictly following scriptural
edicts—worshiping and serving the Supreme Lord is possible?”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “I feel that, when conducted according to scriptural
instructions, great benefit from sädhana and bhajana can be gained. However,
another view is strongly emerging in my mind, namely that sincere hari-bhajana
opens up an ocean of transcendental rasa.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “You see? Scriptural injunctions are your supreme command;
hence, you should embrace the path of vaidhé-bhakti. Gradually, however, the
precepts of rägänuga-bhakti will begin to crystallize further within our
consciousness.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya could not restrain the tears slowly swelling in his eyes.
Getting up and touching the feet of Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, he said, “O master!
Initiate me into your divine wisdom, according to my eligibility. I do not want
to dabble in philosophy outside my limitations.” Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé also stood
up, embraced Lähiré quietly, and indicated for him to sit down. Lähiré Mahäçaya
then said, “Kindly instruct me in the precise method of bhajana I should take
up.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Begin by seriously chanting harinäma. Amongst the
different limbs of bhajana, chanting is the most efficacious. Harinäma and the
proprietor of harinäma are the one and same person. Chanting without committing
offences will quickly lead one to complete perfection. Take up chanting with
full faith. The other branches of devotional practices, all included within
chanting, are hearing, remembering the Lord’s pastimes, serving His lotus feet
in meditation, worshiping His Deity form, offering prayers, becoming His
servant, becoming His friend, and totally surrendering to Him.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “O master! I am eager to begin. Please shower me with your
mercy.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Dear Sir, please always repeat the following mantra and
avoid the nämäparädhas, offences against harinäma: Hare Kåñëa Hare Kåñëa Kåñëa
Kåñëa Hare Hare Hare Räma Hare Räma Räma Räma Hare Hare.”

As Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé uttered this, the mahä-mantra, he gently pressed a set
of chanting beads made of tulasé wood into the hand of Lähiré Mahäçaya. When the
latter began to chant the mahä-mantra on his new beads, he felt tears of
jubilation streak down his face. He exulted, “Dear master! I am unable to
express the joy that I feel!” and collapsed at Bäbäjé’s feet.

Carefully Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé lifted him up and held him steady. After a period
of stunned silence, Lähiré Mahäçaya said, “I am indeed blessed! I have never
before experienced such exhilaration.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Revered Sir! Truly, you are blessed! You have sincerely
taken shelter of harinäma. Thus, you have showered great fortune upon me, also.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya returned to his cottage. Having received initiation, he started
chanting harinäma upon his new beads, pushing aside all fears and doubts. Days
went by in chanting and Lähiré Mahäçaya began to decorate his body with the
vaiñëava-tilaka markings in the customary twelve places. He refused to eat
anything other than prasädam, food offered to the Lord, and steadily increased
his daily chanting up to two lakhs, two hundred thousand names of the Lord. He
offered prostrated obeisances to pure Vaiñëavas as soon as he saw them. He would
begin his daily routine by first offering worship to Paramahaàsa Premadäsa
Bäbäjé and then he would serve his spiritual master, Çré Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé,
constantly and diligently. He lost all interest in trivial talks, as well as
classical music. Thus, a metamorphosis took place in Lähiré Mahäçaya. He was now
a Vaiñëava.

One day, Lähiré Mahäçaya approached Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, prostrated himself
humbly, and enquired, “O master! What is the prayojana-tattva, the principle of
the ultimate spiritual goal and necessity?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Kåñëa-prema is the prayojana-tattva for the jéva.
Constant sädhana in devotional service leads to bhäva. When bhäva matures, it is
called prema. Kåñëa-prema is the eternal occupation of the jéva, his eternal
opulence, his source of supreme joy, and his absolute necessity. The absence of
prema results in the sufferings of the jéva, material entanglement, and
attachment to matter. Nothing is superior to prema, and Çré Kåñëa, the
embodiment of transcendental Absolute Truth, is subdued by prema alone. Änanda,
spiritual bliss, when intensified and condensed, turns into prema, the essence.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, choking with tears, asked, “Will I ever be eligible to
experience prema?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, firmly embracing him, responded, “Behold! In a matter of
days, you have elevated yourself from sädhana-bhakti to bhäva-bhakti. Çré Kåñëa
will soon benedict you further.”

These utterances from his guru had a magical effect upon Lähiré Mahäçaya. He
began to roll in the dust in joy and exclaimed, “Ah! Nothing can surpass the
guru in importance. Alas, how foolishly I have wasted so much of my life. My
guru has lifted me out of the dark well of materialism by his unlimited mercy.”

Thus ends the Fourth Chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: The Nitya-dharma Is
Vaiñëavism

JDH 5: Vaidhé-bhakti Is Nitya-dharma not Naimittika-dharma

Chapter Five
Vaidhé-bhakti Is Nitya-dharma not Naimittika-dharma

Lähiré Mahäçaya had left behind a large household in Çäntipura. His two sons had
completed their education and were well placed in their careers. Candranätha,
who was thirty-five, was in charge of the household and the maintenance of the
landed properties. He was a well-qualified doctor, disinterested in
spirituality, yet an esteemed member of the brähmaëa society. His success
allowed him a fair crew of servants, maidservants, and guards. The second son,
Devédäsa, had been academically inclined from childhood and now studied the
scriptures, specializing in two branches: nyäya, logic; and småti, Vedic
rituals. A proud recipient of the academic degree vidyä-ratna, he had
established a small school with about a dozen students.

Normally humdrum, Çäntipura was this day suddenly astir with the rumour that
Kälidäsa Lähiré had donned the renounced attire of a Vaiñëava. Such an event
became the main topic of discussion at the bathing ghäöas, market places, and
indeed everywhere. As is usual, people were not shy to air their views. Some
cutting remarks were spoken, “He seemed to be doing all right this far in his
life, but now, suddenly, he has become senile and disruptive.” “Well! Well! What
has possessed him? A happy household, a respected brähmaëa, obedient sons and
wife—what problems could have prompted him to go to such an extreme?” “Such a
comedown is natural for one who is always talking of religion and spirituality.”
However, in contrast, the righteous population supported Lähiré Mahäçaya, saying
he was truly pious because, despite his good material situation, he had
developed the desire to take shelter of harinäma. 

Finally, someone carried these rumours to Devédäsa Vidyäratna. Taking his
misgivings to his elder brother, Vidyäratna said, “Great misfortune has
descended upon our father. He lived in Godruma to take advantage of the
wholesome surroundings, but has now fallen into bad company. I don’t dare to
hear what is being said in the town!”

Candranätha responded, “My brother, some of these rumours have reached my own
ears. Our family is very respected, but now all this talk about father! I cannot
show my face anymore. Throughout the years, we have vehemently opposed the
family of Advaita Gosvämé and his philosophy and now look what has happened to
our own family. I think we should consult mother and act as required.” 

That afternoon, the two brothers sat down for lunch on the long, sun-washed
veranda on the first floor of their mansion. The young daughter of a widowed
brähmaëa was serving them while their mother looked on. Candranätha said,
“Mother, have you heard anything about father?”

The mother replied, “Why do you ask? He is quite well as far as I know and has
absorbed himself in chanting. Why don’t you bring him here from Nadia?” Devédäsa
retorted mildly, “His health may be all right, but what is now being batted
around in public regarding his behaviour is most disturbing. And I think
bringing him back here will definitely cause us to lose face.” A little taken
aback, the mother enquired, “What is the matter with your father? The other day
I met the ladies from the house of Advaita Gosvämé on the banks of the Gaìgä and
they said that my husband was very fortunate because now the Vaiñëava community
truly respected him.”

An exasperated Devédäsa replied, “Has he been honoured, or has he brought
calamity on us—that is the question. At his age, he should be here being served
by us instead of eating the remnants of some half-naked persons in kaupénas,
loincloths, and thus smearing the good name of our reputed family. Alas! This is
the doing of Kali-yuga; after so much intelligent research, he has ended up like
this!” 

The mother conceded, “Then the best thing to do will be to bring him here and
keep him in hiding. Here you can patiently and gradually try to convince him of
his mistakes.” Candranätha made the decision, “Yes, there is nothing else we can
do. Devédäsa, take a few men secretly to Godruma and convince father to come
back.” Devédäsa spoke hesitatingly, “I’m sure you know that father dislikes me,
because he thinks that I’m an atheist. It occurs to me that He may not listen to
me.”

Devédäsa’s maternal cousin, Çambhunätha, was known to be their father’s
favourite because he had served Lähiré Mahäçaya satisfactorily for quite some
time. Therefore, it was decided that both Çambhunätha and Devédäsa would proceed
to Godruma. A servant was immediately sent in advance to Godruma to rent
lodgings in a brähmaëa’s house. The next day, Devédäsa and Çambhunätha started
for Godruma. Upon reaching their temporary residence in Godruma, they alighted
from their palanquin and sent off the bearers, but retained a brähmaëa cook and
two servants.

Early that evening, Devédäsa and Çambhunätha walked to Pradyumna-kuïja. Upon
their arrival, they saw Lähiré Mahäçaya seated upon a small square woven-leaf
sitting mat upon the raised platform known affectionately as the Çré
Surabhé-cabutarä in the middle of the wide, open courtyard. Twelve bright tilaka
markings decorated his body and he was chanting on beads with his eyes shut.
After quietly approaching and climbing onto the platform, Çambhunätha and
Devédäsa prostrated themselves before him in respect. Startled, Lähiré Mahäçaya
opened his eyes and recognizing them, said, “Ah! It’s you, Çambhu. What brings
you here? And, how are you, Devé?” They replied respectfully that thanks to his
blessings they were both well. Lähiré Mahäçaya inquired about their lunch, but
they had already eaten. 

Just then, they heard loud utterances of harinäma coming from the direction of
Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé’s cottage in the area of the Çré Mädhavé-mälaté
Maëòapa. Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé came out of his cottage and asked Lähiré Mahäçaya
the reason for the loud chanting coming from the quarters of Paramahaàsa
Premadäsa Bäbäjé. Both of them went to investigate and found that many visiting
Vaiñëavas were circumambulating Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé, whilst loudly
chanting. Vaiñëava däsa and Lähiré also joined the group and, after offering
prostrated obeisances to Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé, all the Vaiñëavas sat
down upon the Çré Mädhavé-mälaté Maëòapa. Devédäsa and Çambhunätha sidled to the
back of the assembly and sat down, like cranes amongst swans.

One of the visiting Vaiñëavas spoke up, “We come from the township of
Kaëöaka-nagara. Our main purpose for coming here is to see the holy sites of
Navadvépa and Mäyäpura and take the dust of the lotus feet of Çré Paramahaàsa
Premadäsa Bäbäjé.”

Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé felt extremely embarrassed and said softly, “I am
but a fallen wretch and you have come to sanctify me.” Soon it became known that
these Vaiñëavas were very talented in singing and glorifying the Lord. Mådaìgas
and karatälas were brought and handed out to them. The clear, melodious voice of
an elderly Vaiñëava began the following song:

çré kåñëa caitanya prabhu nityänanda
gadäé advaita-candra gaura-bhakta-vånda

“O Çré Kåñëa Caitanya, Prabhu Nityänanda, Gadädhara, Advaita Äcärya and the
devotees of Çré Gauräìga. 

aparä karuëa-sindhu vaiñëava öhäkura
mo hena pämara dayä karaha pracura

“O great Vaiñëava master, you are an ocean of compassion, kindly shower this
degraded soul profusely with your benediction. 

jäti-vidyä-dhana-jana-made matta jane
uddhära kara he nätha, kåpä-vitaraëe

“Distribute your kindness, O preceptor, and save those who are inebriated with
delusions of high parentage, learning, wealth and followers. 

kanaka-kämini-lobha, pratiñöhä-väsanä
chäòäiyä çodha more, e mora prärthanä

“To You I earnestly pray that you reform my greed for wealth and women and my
yearning for name and position. 

name ruci, jéve dayä, vaiñëave ulläsa
dayä kari’ deha more, ohe kåñëa-däsa

“Grant me, O sublime servitor of Kåñëa, taste in chanting harinäma, compassion
for the living entities, and the feeling of jubilation in the association of the
Vaiñëavas. 

tomära caraëa-chäyä eka-mätra äçä
jévane maraëe mätra ämära bharasä

“The shade of your lotus feet is my only hope. In life and in death you are my
only solace.”

As the last strains of the song subsided, another song started up, composed by
Lähiré Mahäçaya himself, and full of poetic charm:

miche mäya-vaçe, saàsära-sägare, paòiyä chiäma ämi
karuëa kariyä, diyä päda-chäyä, ämäre tärila tumi

“Shackled by the chains of mäyä, I was drowning in the ocean of material
existence, and you mercifully appeared and saved me by taking me under the
sanctuary of your lotus feet. 

çuna çuna vaiñëava öhäkura
tomära caraëe, sampiyächi mäthä, mora duùkha kara düra

“Kindly hear me, O Vaiñëava master! I have surrendered at your feet, so
mercifully drive away my distress. 

jätira gaurava, kevala raurava, vidyä se avidyä-käla;
çodhiyä ämäya, nitäi-caraëe, sampahe,—jäuka jväla

“The pride of high birth is but a messenger from hell, and material education is
the art of nescience. Pray, redeem my heart and offer it at the lotus feet of
Çré Nityänanda, letting its smouldering pains be forever cooled. 

tomära kåpäya, ämära jihväya, sphuruka yugala-näma
kahe kälédäsa, ämära hådaye, jaguka çré-rädhä-çyäma

“I beg for your mercy, which has the power to make my tongue vibrate with the
sublime names of the Divine Couple. I, Kälidäsa, humbly implore that the
transcendental names of Çré Rädhä and Çré Çyäma incessantly resonate and be
forever invoked in my heart.” 

The song started off as a solo, but ended in a resounding chorus—the song had
intoxicating qualities that had inebriated all persons present. The last
passage, jaguka çré rädhä-çyäma, went through endless encores and the devotees
flung out their arms in ecstatic dance. A few most elevated Vaiñëavas fell limp
to the ground, entranced by kåñëa-prema. It was a truly wonderful sight. 

Devédäsa witnessed this silently, deliberating in his mind that his father had
fully devoted himself to the highest spiritual quest and that it might be an
impossible task to persuade him to return home to Çäntipura. The spiritual
assembly dispersed at midnight, the Vaiñëavas returning to their individual
dwellings. Devédäsa and Çambhunätha took leave of their father, Lähiré Mahäçaya,
and returned to their room.

The next day after lunch, Devédäsa and Çambhunätha went back to the cottage of
Lähiré Mahäçaya, offered him respectful obeisances and sat down. Devédäsa spoke
to his father, “Father, I have a request. Please return to our Çäntipura house.
Here you are facing many hardships, whereas at home we can all serve you with
pleasure. If you permit, we can even add a quiet and separate wing to our
house.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya replied, “It sounds good, but here I have nice saintly
association, which is difficult to find in Çäntipura. In addition, as you also
know, the people of Çäntipura are atheistic and love to criticize others.
Therefore, it is not exactly a peaceful place to live. Indeed, many brähmaëa
families reside there, but by mixing closely with the weaver community, their
intelligence has become infected with guile and cunning. Three symptoms
characterize the Çäntipura population—the wearing of thin, fine clothing,
boastfulness, and Vaiñëava-baiting. There, the descendants of Advaita Äcärya
Prabhu are constantly harassed. Moreover, sadly enough, as a result of the bad
association, even some of their own family members are becoming critical of Çré
Caitanya. Everything considered, I think you should try to make my stay here in
Godruma proper and peaceful. That is what I want.”

Devédäsa spoke warily, “Father! Everything you have said is true. However, why
do you have to communicate at all with the Çäntipura residents? In the
tranquillity of your separate quarters, you can pass your days in prayer and
meditation, whilst pursuing your spiritual search. The daily rituals and rites
of a brähmaëa, such as sandhyä and vandana, are nitya-dharma and to become
immersed in such performances is expected of a great soul like yourself.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya said patiently, “My son! Those times are of the past. Having
stayed in the company of saintly devotees for a few months and after having
received spiritual instructions from my guru, my attitudes and opinions have
irreversibly changed. What you call nitya-dharma I call naimittika-dharma.
Devotional service to the Supreme Lord, Çré Hari, is the only nitya-dharma of
the soul—sandhyä and vandana, etc., are factually naimittika-dharma.”

Devédäsa retorted, “Father! I have not come across any scriptures supporting
your views. Are sandhyä, vandana, etc., not a part of hari-bhajana? If they are,
they are definitely nitya-dharma. Is there a distinction between sandhyä,
vandana, and the vaidhé-bhakti process of çravaëam, kértanam, and so on?”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “Listen to me, my son. Sandhyä, vandana, etc., are part of
karma-käëòa portion of the Vedas, which deals with rituals meant for fruitive
results, and so are very different from vaidhé-bhakti. The karma-käëòa
recommends the practice of sandhyä, vandana, etc., for the attainment of mukti.
In contrast, devotion to the Lord through çravaëam, kértanam, and so on, is
performed without any ulterior motive. The descriptions in the scriptures you
have read regarding the results of çravaëam, kértanam, etc., are merely written
to arouse spiritual interest in materialistic men. The principle aim of
vaidhé-bhakti is to develop rati, attachment, in the heart of the neophyte for
hari-bhakti.”

Devédäsa, “Father, then you must admit that the process of bhajana gives rise to
gauëa, secondary, results.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya: “The achievement of secondary results depends entirely upon the
motivation of the sädhaka, practitioner. A Vaiñëava practices sädhana-bhakti in
order to pave the way for and reach the highest stage of perfection in bhakti.
Someone who is not a Vaiñëava utilizes this process of sädhana-bhakti to achieve
two goals, bhukti, sense gratification, and mukti, liberation. In these two
instances, one may not detect any apparent difference in the external practice
of sädhana-bhakti, but the main distinction is in the motivation. Worshiping the
Deity of Çré Kåñëa in the karma-käëòa process will result in cleansing the
heart, the attainment of mukti, the mitigation of material distress and disease,
and other mundane advantages. 

“However, in çuddha-bhakti, the same worship of Deity of Kåñëa offers an
increased taste for the chanting of harinäma. The observance of Ekädaçé vows for
a karmi, fruitive worker, absolves sins, but for a vaiñëava-bhakta, Ekädaçé vows
are followed to augment his devotion to the Supreme Lord. Do you not see the
great difference? Of course, to discern accurately these subtle differences one
needs the Lord’s blessings. The karmis cannot look beyond their myopic gauëa
goals, but the true devotees succeed in obtaining the mukhya, primary and
absolute, objectives. All the gauëa results can be brought under two headings:
bhukti and mukti.”

Devédäsa, “Then why have the scriptures gone to such lengths to praise these
gauëa results?”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “There are two types of men in the world: udita-viveka and
anudita-viveka. The latter refuse any good constructive work unless they see
immediate and concrete, mundane results. Therefore, the praise heaped upon gauëa
results is for the benefit of these people. However, the true import of the
scriptures does not indicate that people should remain complacently satisfied
with their gauëa results. Rather the scriptures intend that those of slumbering
conscience may be attracted by the gauëa results initially, but then within a
short time, by the grace of a pure Vaiñëava, they may hear about the mukhya
results and gradually develop an attraction for this higher goal.”

Devédäsa, “Would you consider the smärta, Raghunandana, a paëòita of the
småti-ñästras, and others like him to be in the lower category of
anudita-viveka?”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “No, they personally were striving for the mukhya results, but
they made arrangements through their writings to guide the anudita-viveka.”

Devédäsa, “In some scriptures one reads only about the gauëa results without any
mention of the mukhya results. How may this be explained?”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “The scriptures can be grouped into three categories, which
correspond to the three levels of human consciousness: sattvika scriptures in
sattva-guëa, the mode of goodness, for people in the sattva-guëa; räjasika
scriptures in raja-guëa, the mode of passion, for people in raja-guëa; and
tämasika scriptures in tama-guëa, the mode of ignorance, for people in
tama-guëa.” 

Devédäsa, “Then, given the variety of scriptural instructions, how does one
discern which scriptural directives one should trust and believe, and which
should be rejected? And how may a man elevate himself from the lower ranks of
consciousness?”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “Human beings can be classified according to the level of their
nature, habits, and faith. And corresponding to their faith, people seek the
appropriate scriptures. A sattvika person has a natural faith and inclination
towards sattvika scriptures, a räjasika person towards räjasika scriptures, and
a tämasika person towards tämasika scriptures. Trust and belief grow easily upon
the foundation of faith. When one performs one’s duties prompted by faith and an
increasing level of understanding in the potent association of saintly persons,
one can advance to higher levels of consciousness. 

“The sages who wrote the scriptures were perfect personalities. The methods
employed by them in formulating the scriptures ensure that if anyone diligently
and faithfully executes his specific duties as recommended in the scriptures, he
progresses higher. Thus, we find diversities in the many scriptures.
Nevertheless, unwavering faith in the scriptures ushers in all good fortune. The
conclusion of all the scriptures is the Bhagavad-gétä, which delineates this
esoteric precept.”

Devédäsa, “I have been studying many different scriptures from my early years,
but today by your grace I have understood a unique philosophical point.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “The Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 11.8.10, writes:

aëubhyaç ca mahadbhyaç ca
çästrebhyaù kuçalo naraù
sarvataù säram ädadyät
puñpebhya iva ñaöpadaù

“‘Just as the honeybee takes nectar from all flowers, big and small, an
intelligent human being should take the essence from all religious scriptures.’

“I remember, my son, I used to call you an atheist, but now I have stopped
criticizing people. No one should be faulted for adhering to their individual
level of adhikära, qualification. At the appropriate time, they will be promoted
to higher levels. You are a paëòita in tarka-çästra, the scriptures of logic,
and karma-çästra, the scriptures of fruitive work, therefore there is no offence
in your level of realization, which is based upon these scriptures.”

Devédäsa, “Earlier, I held the false opinion that there are no paëòitas in the
vaiñëava-sampradäyas. I thought they were fanatics respecting only revelation
and believing only in particular segments of the revealed scriptures. I am
convinced now there are also broadminded seekers of truth amongst the Vaiñëavas.
Are you presently studying the scriptures under a teacher?”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “My son, you may call me a fanatic Vaiñëava or anything else,
as you please. My Gurudeva lives in that cottage and does his bhajana there. He
has taught me the essence of all the scriptures, which I have repeated to you.
If you also wish to learn, then approach him humbly and enquire from him with
devotion. Come, I will introduce you to him.” Lähiré Mahäçaya guided Devédäsa to
Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé’s cottage and, after introducing him, left him with his
guru and retired to his own room, quietly sitting down to continue his chanting
while the following conversation ensued.

Vaiñëava däsa, “Have you concluded your education, my son?”

Devédäsa, “I have studied up to Mukti-päda and Siddhänta- kusumäïjali in
nyäya-çästra. In småti-çästra I have read all the books.”

Vaiñëava däsa, “I see you have worked hard in your studies of the scriptures.
What have you learnt? What is the outcome of your efforts?”

Devédäsa, “…atyanta-duùkha-nivåttir eva muktiù… ‘One must constantly strive for
mukti.’ I am searching for mukti through the faithful execution my prescribed
religious duties.”

Vaiñëava däsa, “Yes, I was like you once. I have also studied those books and
sought the release of mukti.”

Devédäsa, “Am I to presume that you have given up that endeavour?”

Vaiñëava däsa, “Son, tell me, what is your concept of mukti?”

Devédäsa: “The nyäya-çästra espouses the existence of an eternal difference
between the jéva and Brahman. Thus, in nyäya-çästra it is not clear exactly how
mukti, the cessation of all suffering, takes place. However, the Vedäntic
viewpoint holds that mukti is the quest for the undifferentiated Brahman. To me
this is definitely more comprehensible.”

Vaiñëava däsa, “Son, I had studied thoroughly the Vedänta literature in the line
of Çaìkaräcärya for a good fifteen years before I entered the sannyäsa order;
wherein for a further number of years I endeavoured assiduously for mukti. I
accepted the four mahä-väkyas of Çaìkaräcärya and profoundly meditated upon
their purport. Nevertheless, finally I discarded that discipline and philosophy,
having decided that it was shallow and immature.”

Devédäsa, “What prompted your conviction?”

Vaiñëava däsa, “Certainly it is not easy to describe to others the trials and
tests with which one has been confronted. How will others understand?”

Devédäsa could understand from his conversation that Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé was a
profound paëòita, guileless and self-realized. He had not yet studied the
Vedänta and so considered that if Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé would kindly consent to
teach him, then he could master the Vedänta as well. Therefore, he said, “Sir,
do you think I am an eligible candidate for studying the Vedänta?”

Vaiñëava däsa, “Seeing that you have sufficient knowledge of Sanskrit, you could
study Vedänta, if you find a teacher.”

Devédäsa, “If you would kindly teach me! I am more than willing.”

Vaiñëava däsa, “My present situation is that I am simply a poor servant of the
Vaiñëavas. Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé has been very merciful to me,
instructing me to always chant harinäma. Therefore I try to do his bidding and
have very little other time left. Besides, Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has strictly
forbidden the Vaiñëavas to read or hear Çaìkaräcärya’s exposition upon Vedänta,
the Çäréraka-bhäñya; therefore, I do not read or teach that book. 

“Çré Caitanya, however, the original spiritual master of the entire creation,
explained the Vedänta-sütra-bhäñya to Çréla Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya. This is
available amongst a few Vaiñëavas in the form of a hand-written manuscript—you
may copy this from one of them and then study it. I may help your understanding,
if I can. In fact, you could approach Çrémat Kavi Karëapüra of Käïcana-pallé
village and procure a copy from him.”

Devédäsa, “I will pursue this matter with great care. Sir, you have vast
knowledge of Vedänta, kindly tell me very plainly if I can find the real essence
of the Vedänta by studying the Vaiñëava commentary?”

Vaiñëava däsa, “I have studied and taught the Çaìkara commentary. I have also
scrutinized other commentaries, including the Çré-bhäñya of Çré Rämänujäcärya.
The Gaudiya-Vaiñëavas study the elaborations of the aphorisms made by Çré
Caitanya and explained by Çré Gopénätha Äcärya. In my experience, I have not yet
come across anything superior and more exhaustive. No further theories,
annotations, or new doctrines are necessary after the elaboration given by the
Supreme Lord. The essence of all the Upaniñads is available in these
dissertations. If someone can take the pains to compile these elaborations
systematically, then no other commentaries will be so appreciated by the
scholars of Vedänta.”

The words of Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé gave Devédäsa profound joy and he offered his
prostrate obeisances. Proceeding from there to his father’s room, he narrated
everything to his father, who became jubilant, proclaiming, “Devé, you have read
and heard enough, now you must search for the real purpose of life, the ultimate
goal!” 

Devédäsa, “Father, I came to Godruma feeling extremely hopeful that I could
bring you back with me. If you kindly come just this one time, we would be very
happy. Especially, our dear mother is keen to have your darçana, sight.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “I have accepted the shelter of the lotus feet of the Vaiñëavas
and have taken a vow not to visit any non-Vaiñëava house. First, all of you
should become Vaiñëavas, then you can take me.”

Devédäsa, “Father, I do not understand your instructions. We worship the Lord in
our house. We have never shown disrespect to harinäma. We serve and care for
guests and Vaiñëavas. Are we not Vaiñëavas?”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “I recognize that apparently there are no differences between
your activities and those of the Vaiñëavas, yet you are not Vaiñëavas in the
true sense.”

Devédäsa, “Then please tell me what we should do to become true Vaiñëavas?”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “First you must denounce your materialistic mentality, your
naimittika-bhäva, attachment to temporary rituals, and embrace the values of the
eternal religion, nitya-dharma. Then you are ready to become Vaiñëavas.”

Devédäsa, “I have this nagging doubt, which you will kindly dissipate. The
Vaiñëava devotional activities of çravaëam, kértanam, smaraëam, pädasevanam,
arcana, vandana, däsyam, säkhyam, and ätmä-nivedanam appear to be diluted with
material activities. Then, could not these be called naimittika-karma, as well?
I detect a certain bias in this matter. Deity worship, fasting, using material
things in worship, all these are part of the mundane nature, so how can they be
designated as nitya, eternal?”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “Son, it took me a long time to grasp this point, so try to
understand it properly. Human beings are of two kinds: aihika, worldly; and
päramärthika, spiritual. Worldly men seek only temporal and corporal pleasures,
including respect and material advancement. Spiritual persons are of three
categories: éçänugata, those surrendered to the Supreme Lord; jïäna-niñöha,
those desiring monistic knowledge with a view to emancipation; and siddhi-kämi,
those aspiring for mystic powers. 

“The siddhi-kämi are absorbed in the attempt to enjoy the fruits of karma-käëòa,
ritualistic performances. They want to obtain mystic powers and thus display
miracles by pressing into service different yäga, rites; yajïa, sacrifices; and
the system of añöäìga-yoga, eightfold yogic discipline. They take the view that
if an Éçvara, Supreme Controller, exists then He is subservient to the laws of
karma. Modern scientists belong to this group. 

“The jïäna-niñöha cultivate empirical monistic philosophy, endeavouring to
realize their identity with Brahman. They do not know, or hardly care, whether
an Éçvara exists or not. Nonetheless, to suit their particular practice of
sädhana, they imagine that an Éçvara exists and practice bhakti towards this
imaginary form. Gradually, their endeavours are rewarded with appropriate
results and at this point their imagined Éçvara is no longer useful or
imperative. Thus, this bhakti to Éçvara, they believe, is transformed at the
time of enlightenment into their particular definition of jïäna, which is
monistic identity with the impersonal Brahman. This philosophy does not accept
Bhagavän or bhakti to Bhagavän as being nitya.

“The éçänugata category of spiritual men comprises of those who are actually
surrendered to Éçvara. This group is truly seeking spirituality. They believe in
an eternal, unlimited, and personal Éçvara, who has created both the jévas and
the material nature by His potencies. They understand that the jévas are the
eternal servants of Éçvara and that an eternal mood bhakti in respect to
Bhagavän is the nitya-dharma of the jéva. They appreciate that the jéva by his
own minute potency alone is incapable of attaining spiritual realization. Karma
cannot offer the jéva any eternal results, and monistic jïäna simply warps and
distorts the vision of the ultimate, eternal truth. However, by the mercy of Çré
Kåñëa, all spiritual perfection for the jéva is ensured when the jéva executes
bhakti to Him.

“The first two categories of spiritualists are thus known as the followers of
karma-käëòa and jïäna-käëòa, respectively. Only members of the third category
can truly be called devotees. The first two categories claim to be true
spiritualists, but in reality they are not seeking the highest goal but are
worldly-minded and seeking material gain. Thus, their religious goals and
practices are all ultimately naimittika.

“Those who worship Durgä-devé, Gaëeça, Çiva, and Sürya are followers of the
jïana-käëòa. Their participation in the sravaëam, kértanam, etc., of bhakti is
done solely with the motive of obtaining mukti, which they define as the
achievement of merging into the impersonal, undifferentiated Brahman. Those
amongst them, who are not desirous of bhukti or mukti, when performing çravaëam,
kértanam, etc., are factually serving the Supreme Lord, Çré Viñëu, through the
medium of these different devas. Amongst these five deities, the çré-mürté,
deity form, of Bhagavän Çré Viñëu is eternal, absolutely spiritual, and
omnipotent. However, if one worships the çré-mürté of Bhagavän Çré Viñëu not
accepting it to be non-different from Bhagavän Himself, then the worship is
mundane and temporary.

“Dear son, the deity worship you conduct at home is not paramärthika, because
you do not acknowledge that the çré-mürté of Bhagavän is eternal and
transcendental. This is probative that you are not an éçänugata surrendered to
Bhagavän. I hope you have been enlightened about the difference between
nitya-upäsanä, eternal deity worship, and naimittika-upäsanä, temporary
ritualistic deity worship.”

Devédäsa, “Yes! If one worships the çré-mürté, but does not accept this form as
eternal, such worship is material and not spiritual. Nevertheless, could this
mundane, ritualistic worship not offer the worshiper clues to the other higher,
spiritual truths?”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “That may be true, but still such worship cannot be designated
as nitya-dharma. In vaiñëava-dharma, Vaiñëavas worship the Lord’s çré-mürté as
His eternal form; hence their worship is nitya-dharma.”

Devédäsa, “The çré-mürté forms are sculptured by man from matter—how may one see
them as absolute and eternal?”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “The çré-mürté worship of the Vaiñëavas is not the same as that
idea. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is positively not the niräkära-brahman,
the formless Brahman. He is sat, cit, änanda, vigraha—the embodied form of
eternality, absolute knowledge, and transcendental bliss, endowed with all
potencies. This is the çré-mürti of Vaiñëava worship. At first, the form of
Bhagavän appears in the spiritual consciousness of the devotee and is reflected
within his mind. The çré-mürté is then constructed according to this vision of
the devotee, and through the potency of bhakti, Bhagavän is attracted to
manifest His sac-cid-änanda form from within the çré-mürté. When the pure
devotee sees the çré-mürti of Bhagavän, that çré-mürté unites with the
transcendental form of Bhagavän that the devotee sees within his heart.

“The jïänés’ conception of çré-mürté worship is not the same as that of the
Vaiñëavas. The jïänés believe that the Brahman concept is fused into the
material form of the deity by their imagination, and the Brahman remains in that
material form as long as is needed for worship. Later, the form is to be
considered a mere material object. Ponder upon these points deeply and try to
understand the differences in these approaches to deity worship. When one, by
the mercy of a genuine guru, receives initiation into the path of Vaiñëavism,
then the different results of these contrasting forms of deity worship become
understandable.”

Devédäsa, “I have gradually become convinced that the Vaiñëavas are not
fanatics, but are capable of rational analysis and of deeply probing the science
of arcanam, deity worship. On one hand, worshiping the çré-mürté of Bhagavän as
non-different from the sac-cid-änanda form of the Lord and, on the other hand,
extrapolating the concept of impersonal Brahman onto matter and then worshiping
the deity are certainly opposing processes. Superficially, the rituals and
performances may appear to be the same, however there is a great distinction in
the faith and conceptions of the worshippers. Father, you have removed a major
doubt in my mind, and I will contemplate these subjects seriously. I am now
convinced that the jïänés mode of the deity worship is ultimately a form of
deception and a denial of the eternal form of Çré Bhagavän. All is well for
now—I will continue our discussion later and pray at your feet for more
answers.”

Devédäsa Vidyäratna and Çambhu returned to their lodging and came back to Lähiré
Mahäçaya later in the evening. No further discussions were possible at that time
because everyone was simply engrossed in the joy of singing and chanting
harinäma. 

The next day, in the afternoon, Devédäsa and Çambhu came and joined the other
Vaiñëavas assembled in the courtyard of Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé. Devédäsa
and Çambhu sat close to Lähiré Mahäçaya. Just then, the Käzé, a head of the
Muslim religion and the magistrate of Brähmaëa Puñkariëé village, arrived.
Standing up courteously, the Vaiñëavas welcomed the Käzé heartily. In turn, the
Käzé exchanged warm greetings with the Vaiñëavas and joined them. Everyone sat
together, expectantly waiting to hear Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé speak.

Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé addressed the Kazi, “You are truly fortunate, being
a descendant of Çré Chänd Kazi, who was personally favoured by our Lord, Çréman
Mahäprabhu. So please be merciful upon us.” The Käzé replied, “By Çré Caitanya’s
mercy we are also the recipients of the Vaiñëavas’ mercy. Çré Gauräìga is the
Lord of our hearts. We begin everything by first offering our humble obeisances
to Him.” 

Lähiré Mahäçaya was proficient in both Urdu and Arabic, the languages used by
the Muslims. He had deeply studied the holy Koran-sharéf, having read all the
thirty sephäräs, corollaries. In addition, he was well acquainted with the Sufi
philosophy and had studied many of their literatures. Taking the opportunity of
the Käzé’s presence, he asked him, “What is the Islamic concept of mukti?”

The Käzé replied, “Our equivalent of the Sanskrit term jéva is rüh. Rüh is found
in two conditions of existence: rüh-mujarrad, the liberated soul; and
rüh-tarkébé, the conditioned soul. Our term for cit, spirit, is mujarrad, and
for acit, matter, we use the term jism. Mujarrad-rüh, the pure souls, reside in
the spiritual realm of alam-misal, which is transcendental to material time and
space. The tarakébi-rüh, the conditioned souls, reside in jisam, which is bound
by time and space. The tarakébi-rüh, conditioned souls, are endowed with a
material mind, which is full of desire and malaphuö, ignorance. However, the
mujarrad-rüh, pure souls, are pure and aloof from the contaminations of jisam,
the impure existence, and reside in the spiritual region known as älam
al-maçhäl.

The rüh is purified by the flowering of içhqh, spiritual love. The place to
where Payagambara Saheb, the prophet, was taken by Khodä, the Supreme Lord, is
not influenced by jisam, but even there the rüh is bandä, servitor, and Khodä is
the master. Therefore, the relationship between bandä and Khodä is eternal. To
attain this status by purification is known as mukti. The Koran-sharéf and the
books of the Sufis have recorded all these points, but not everyone can
comprehend the meanings. Since Çré Gauräìga instructed Chänd Käzé on these
esoteric subjects, we have been able to pursue the pure devotional path and
become pure devotees.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “What is the essential lesson of the Koran-sharéf?”

Käzé, “The Koran has described behesht, the personal abode of Khodä, but has not
greatly detailed ebädat, liberated spiritual life. However, we understand that
life there is ebädata, eternal, and in the presence of Khodä the mujarrad-rüh
are engrossed in sublime joy by His sight. All this has been confirmed by the
teachings of Çré Gauräìga Deva.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “Does Khodä have a form?”

Käzé, “The Koran-sharéf denies that Khodä has form. However, Çré Caitanya
elucidated to Chänd Käzé that this indicates that the Koran forbids a jisamani,
material form of Khodä, but does not forbid the pure mujar-radi, transcendental
form. The Payagambara Saheb, the prophet, saw the ecstatic form of Khodä to the
degree of his particular elevation and eligibility. However, the rasas,
spiritual mellows, were veiled to him.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “What is the Sufi philosophy?”

Kazi, “In their philosophy the main concept is anä al-ùaqq: ‘I am Khodä.’ Your
monistic advaitaväda philosophy and the Sufi aswaph philosophy are very
similar.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya, “Are you a Sufi?”

Kazi, “No, we follow the pure devotional path; we are surrendered to Çré
Gauräìga.”

The discussion continued for some time, the Kazé finally taking leave of the
Vaiñëavas, offering them his respects. The evening concluded with congregational
chanting of harinäma. 

Thus ends the Fifth Chapter of the Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Vaidhé-bhakti is
Nitya-dharma not Naimittika-dharma

JDH 6: Nitya-dharma: Birth and Caste Differences

Chapter Six
Nitya-dharma: Birth and Caste Differences

Devédäsa was a teacher and had firmly believed for a long time that the
brähmaëas were the noblest of the varëas, castes, and that it was the sole
prerogative of the brähmaëas to pursue the path of spirituality. Mukti was not
available to men of other varëas, but only to brähmaëas by birth. He considered
that from birth a brähmaëa progressively realizes his oneness with Brahman by
the performance of his prescribed varëäsrama duties. Naturally, therefore,
Devédäsa was very vexed by the conversation between the Käzé and the Vaiñëavas
he had witnessed a few days before. He was unable to grasp the meaning of the
Käzé’s talk. He said to himself, “These yavanas, Muslims, are very strange
people and their philosophy is equally an enigma. It is all right for my father
to talk with them, as he is proficient in the Persian and Arabic languages and
has also researched all the different religious philosophies. Nevertheless, I
wonder why he was so friendly to them? A Hindu has to take a bath upon even
touching a yavana, why then did Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé and Paramahaàsa Premadäsa
Bäbäjé affectionately invite the Käzé to join their assembly and sit amidst
them?”

That night, Devédäsa, unable to contain his mental agitation, declared to his
cousin, “Çambhu! I will ignite the flames of religious debate and incinerate the
päñaëòa, heretic, philosophy. This Navadvépa, which was the famous arena for
debates upon nyäya çästra between illustrious scholars such as Särvabhauma and
Çiromaëi, and which has witnessed Raghunandana’s great dissertations upon the
twenty-eight treatises that he compiled from all the småti-çästra, has now to
bear the upstart behaviour of the Vaiñëavas being overly friendly to the
yavanas! I am sure the scholars and pedagogues of Navadvépa are as of yet
unaware of this incident!” 

It took Devédäsa a few days to prepare for the plunge into his self-assigned
mission. Finally, the day arrived, heralding a continuous nagging drizzle that
spread a dismal sheet of slick everywhere. All morning, the clouds did not allow
a glance of the sun upon the earth. At midday, sensing the time for their
fateful debate had arrived, Devédäsa and Çambhu ate hot khicuré. The afternoon
remained overcast with low hanging clouds continuing to shroud the sun.

Delayed by the bad weather, the Vaiñëavas returned later than usual after their
daily mädhukaré food collection rounds. Now, at three in the afternoon, having
taken prasädam, some Vaiñëavas sat chanting upon their beads in a large cottage
adjacent to the courtyard of the Çré Mädhavé-mälaté Maëòapa. Paramahaàsa
Premadäsa Bäbäjé, Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, a visiting Vaiñëava paëòita from
Nåsiàhapallé named Ananta däsa, Lähiré Mahäçaya, and Yädava däsa of Kuliyä
village were seated there, quietly relishing the nectar of chanting harinäma. 

Suddenly, they were interrupted by the arrival of Devédäsa Vidyäratna,
accompanied by Caturbhuja Pädaratna of Samudragarh, Cintämaëi Nyäyaratna from
Käçé, Kälidäsa Väcaspati from Pürvasthalé, and the famous paëòita, Kåñëa
Cüòämaëi. The Vaiñëavas heartily welcomed this small group of brähmaëa paëòitas,
requesting them to take seats.

Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé, being the senior-most Vaiñëava, said, “Most people
complain that a rainy day like today is bothersome. However, for us, because
today brähmaëa paëòitas from the holy dhäma have graciously come to sanctify our
humble dwellings with the dust of their feet, it is an auspicious day.” 

The Vaiñëavas are naturally very humble, even more so than a blade of grass.
Therefore, they offered their respect by uttering: …vipra caraëebhyoù namaù...
“I offer obeisances at the feet of the brähmaëas.” By nature, these particular
brähmaëa paëòitas were very proud. Returning the greetings of the Vaiñëavas, the
paëòitas superciliously waved their hands in a gesture of blessing and took
their seats.

Devédäsa Vidyäratna had already prepared these young brähmaëa paëòitas for a
debate. Seeing Lähiré Mahäçaya, the paëòitas grudgingly offered him respects
since he was their senior. In turn, Lähiré Mahäçaya, being conversant with the
scriptural conclusions, immediately reciprocated their offering of respect.
Amongst the paëòitas, Kåñëa Cüòämaëi was very expert in argument. He had a
record of defeating many paëòitas in Käçi, Mithilä, and many other places. A
person of diminutive stature with a shiny dark complexion and a grave demeanour,
his eyes were a pair of incandescent spots.

He initiated the debate in the assembly, beginning, “We have come today to have
darçana of Vaiñëavas. We do not subscribe to all your etiquette and activities,
but we definitely appreciate your sincere devotion. The Supreme Lord has said in
the Bhagavad-gétä, 9.30:

api cet su-duräcäro 
bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù 
samyag-vyavasito hi saù

“‘Even if one commits the most abominable action, if he is engaged in devotional
service, he is to be considered saintly because he is properly situated in his
determination.’

“This quotation from the Bhagavad-gétä is our attestation. On the strength of
this verse, we have come to meet sädhus. However, there is also a further
purpose to our visit. We wish to challenge your malpractice of keeping amicable
relations and association with yavanas in the name of bhakti. I request the best
debater amongst you to come forward.”

The Vaiñëavas became a little saddened upon hearing Kåñëa Cüòämaëi’s reproach,
Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé replying, “We are fools. What do we know about
debating? Our norms and etiquette simply emulate the example set by our
mahäjanas, who are the previous äcäryas and sädhus of devotional authority. We
will silently hear your instructions from the scriptures.”

Cüòämaëi replied, “We must say that such friendly dealings with yavanas are
highly irregular! As a segment of Hindu society, if your personal conduct and
teachings are against the injunctions of çästra, such behaviour will surely act
to destroy civilised mankind. How can you justify your whimsical behaviour with
the yavanas by claiming to be following the previous mahäjanas, äcäryas, and
sädhus? Furthermore, who should be designated as a mahäjana? Designating just
anybody as a mahäjana and then citing the scriptural injunction: …mahäjano yena
gataù sa panthäù… ‘One should follow in the footsteps of mahäjanas,’ does not
solve the raging problems of the world.”

Upon hearing this provocative statement, the Vaiñëavas courteously left the
assembly place and gathered in another cottage nearby to consult amongst
themselves. They decided that since the paëòitas had blasphemed their mahäjanas,
if at all possible the paëòitas should certainly be refuted. Paramahaàsa
Premadäsa Bäbäjé was not keen to represent their group and, though Ananta däsa
Paëòita was an expert in the nyäya-çästra and the philosophy of logic, they
chose Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé to debate on their behalf. 

The Vaiñëavas had gathered that Devédäsa Vidyäratna was the architect of today’s
dilemma. His father, Lähiré Mahäçaya, spoke out unhesitatingly, “Devédäsa is a
very arrogant boy. He was definitely disturbed by our amiable dealings with the
Käzé the other day, and so he must have incited these brähmaëa paëòitas to come
here today.” Bending down to touch Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé’s feet, Vaiñëava
däsa Bäbäjé said, “I carry the orders of the Vaiñëavas as a crown upon my head.
I believe that all my previous education and scriptural research will now turn
out to be of value.”

The drizzle having let up, the scattered clouds allowed little patches of blue
to peep through. A large simple carpet was laid out to cover the major portion
of the Çré Mädhavé-mälaté Maëòapa courtyard. The brähmaëa paëòitas sat upon one
side of the carpet, the Vaiñëavas facing them upon the other. The learned
Vaiñëavas from Godruma and nearby surrounding areas were invited to attend the
debate and sat in the periphery, surrounding the two groups of contestants. Many
eager brähmaëa students had also gathered, so the congregation soon swelled to a
fair size—an estimated one hundred brähmaëa paëòitas and students on one side
and about two hundred Vaiñëavas on the opposite side. Having taken permission
and blessings from the Vaiñëavas, Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé sat at their head, a
picture of calm composure. Suddenly, everyone witnessed a wonderful omen causing
the Vaiñëavas to jubilantly chant harinäma: All at once, a confetti of flower
petals had rained down upon Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé from above. Amongst themselves
the Vaiñëavas concluded, “This is the prasäda, mercy, of Çré Caitanya.”

Kåñëa Cüòämaëi, who was sitting across from them, puckered his nose in obvious
disdain and said, “You are mistaken, for it is not the flowers, but the
resulting fruits that matter.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé began abruptly without further pomp or frills, he said, “It
seems that in Navadvépa I can at last find an assembly similar to those I’ve
seen in Väräëasé, which fact gives me great pleasure. Actually, I am a Bengali,
yet most of my life, I’ve spent in Väräëasé and other places, studying and
giving talks. Therefore, my proficiency in Bengali has lessened considerably, so
I desire that today’s discussion be conducted in Sanskrit.” 

Kåñëa Cüòämaëi had diligently and sincerely laboured to study the scriptures,
but, other than learning by rote, he was not fully conversant with Sanskrit, and
hence not confident to debate in the language. He felt shaky upon hearing
Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé’s proposal and blurted out, “The fact is that we are
holding this assembly in Bengal, so speaking in Bengali is more appropriate.
Besides, I am not fluent in Sanskrit like the paëòitas from the northwest.”
Everyone understood from Cüòämaëi’s expression that he was becoming apprehensive
of debating with Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, so they requested Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé to
converse in Bengali, to which he readily agreed.

Cüòämaëi began the debate with a volley of questions, “Is jäti, birth-group, not
a nitya, permanent, distinction for the human being? Are Hindus and Muslims not
of different jäti, birth-group? Is not a Hindu degraded by associating with a
Muslim?” 

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé replied, “Yes, the nyäya-çästra states that jäti is nitya.
However, the term jäti that we find in the nyäya-çästra refers not only to race
and caste, but also to species. The term nitya-jäti-bheda, permanent distinction
between birth-groups, that we find mentioned in the nyäya-çästra, does not
intend to indicate distinctions between the various races of human beings born
in the different countries of the world. Rather, when using the term
nitya-jäti-bheda, the intention of the nyäya-çästra is to point out the
invariable distinction in jäti that exists between the various species of living
entities. For example, there are permanent distinctions between the goat
species, the cow species, and the human species.”

Cüòämaëi, “I agree with your analysis, but is there not a distinction in
jäti—this time meaning caste—between Hindus and Muslims?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Yes, there is some dissimilarity in both these jätis, but
they are neither permanent, nor eternal. The human species is one. The
differences lie in language, country, attire, complexion, caste, and so on—and
based on these men have created imaginary permanent distinctions, which they
wrongly designate as jäti distinctions.”

Cüòämaëi, “Are there no distinctions at all, even on the basis of birth, between
a Hindu and a Muslim? Or are the differences simply limited to the areas of
attire, language, and so on?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “The jéva is born into high or low caste as a result of
his karma, the activities of his previous lives. Depending on caste, humans have
specific duties. There are four castes: brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas, and
çüdras; others are antyajas, low-born outcastes.”

Cüòämaëi, “Are the yavanas, Muslims, outcastes?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Yes, according to the scriptural decrees they are
antyajas, outcastes; they do not qualify for the Vedic castes.”

Cüòämaëi, “If this be true, how then can a yavana ever become a Vaiñëava? And
should advanced Aryan Vaiñëava society socialize with yavanas?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “A human being who has developed unalloyed devotion to the
Supreme Lord is a Vaiñëava and every human being is eligible to become a
Vaiñëava. On account of their low birth, yavanas have no right to perform the
duties prescribed for the four varëas in the varëäçrama system, but they have
full eligibility to participate in bhakti. 

“As long as one has not meticulously analysed and understood the subtle
distinctions between karma-käëòa, jïana-käëòa, and bhakti-käëòa—known as the
three upäsanä-käëòas—it is impossible to conclude that one has attained proper
comprehension of the scriptures.”

Cüòämaëi, “So be it. Karma—the prescribed duties of varëäçrama—cleanses the
consciousness. When one’s consciousness is purified, one becomes eligible to
gather jïäna, knowledge. From jïäna, there spring two varieties of knowledgeable
persons, known as jïänés: nirbheda-brahman-vädé, the followers of monism; and
the saviçeña-vädé, those who worship the personal form of Bhagavän—the
Vaiñëavas. Therefore, without perfecting the stage of varëäçrama-karma a person
cannot become a Vaiñëava. Muslims are not eligible to execute varëäçrama-karma,
so how can they ascend to bhakti?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Persons outside the varëäçrama system, the antyajas are
also eligible to embrace the path of bhakti. All scriptures have supported this
point. The Bhagavad-gétä 9.32 states:

mäà hi pärtha vyapäçritya 
ye ‘pi syuù päpa-yonayaù
striyo vaiçyäs tathä çüdräs 
te ‘pi yänti paräà gatim

“‘O son of Pärtha, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth—women, vaiçyas, (merchants) and çüdras (menial labourers) and of sinful
families—can attain the supreme destination.’

“Here bhakti is indicated by the word äçritya, taking shelter. This is confirmed
in the Skanda Puräëa, Käçé-khaëòa 21.63, which is quoted in the
Hari-bhakti-viläsa 10.106:

brähmaëaù kñatriyo vaiçyaù 
çüdro vä yadi vetaraù
viñëu-bhakti-samäyukto 
jïeyaù sarvottamaç ca saù

“‘Whether one is a brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya, çüdra, or an outcaste, if he has
taken shelter of viñëu-bhakti, he is considered to be superior to all.’

“Further, we find in the Näradéya-puräëa, which is quoted in the
Hari-bhakti-viläsa 10.87:

çvapaco ‘pi mahépäla 
viñëu-bhakto dvijädhikaù
viñëu bhakti-vihéno yo 
yatiç ca çvapacädhikaù

“‘O king, if a caëòäla, dogeater, embraces the path of pure devotion to the
Supreme Lord, Çré Viñëu, he is superior to a brähmaëa. On the other hand, if a
sannyäsé is not a devotee of Çré Viñëu, then he is more degraded than a
caëòäla.’

Cüòämaëi, “Granted, there are numerous scriptural proofs—but it is imperative to
draw conclusions. What is the method for removing the blemish of a birth in a
base caste? Can this birth-slur be abrogated in any way other than with death
and thus rebirth?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “The misfortune of a low birth results from
prärabdha-karma, sinful reactions, from the activities of previous births. Such
reactions are eliminated by the chanting of harinäma. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam
6.16.44 declares:

yan-näma sakåc chravaëät
pukkaço ‘pi vimucyate saàsärät

“‘Merely by hearing harinäma only once, even caëòälas, men of the lowest class,
are freed from all material contamination.’

“Further, in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam 6.2.46:

nätaù paraà karma-nibandha-kåntanaà
mumukñatäà tértha-padänukértanät
na yat punaù karmasu sajjate mano
rajas-tamobhyäm kalilaà tato ‘nyathä 

“‘Therefore, one who desires freedom from material bondage should adopt the
process of chanting and glorifying the name, fame, form, and pastimes of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, at whose feet all the holy places stand. One
cannot derive the proper benefit from other methods, such as pious atonement,
speculative knowledge and meditation in mystic yoga, because even after
following such methods one takes to fruitive activities again, unable to control
his mind, which is contaminated by the base qualities of nature, namely passion
and ignorance.’

“Furthermore, in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam 3.33.7:

aho bata çvapaco ‘to garéyän
yaj-jihvägre vartate näma tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuù sasnur äryä
brahmänücur näma gåëanti ye te 

“‘Oh, how glorious are they whose tongues are chanting harinäma! Even if born in
the families of dogeaters, such persons are worshipable. Persons who chant
harinäma must have executed all kinds of austerities and fire sacrifices and
achieved all the good manners of the Aryans. To be chanting harinäma they must
have bathed at the holy places of pilgrimage, studied the Vedas, and fulfilled
everything required.’

Cüòämaëi, “In that case, why cannot a caëòäla who is chanting harinäma perform
yajïa, fire sacrifice?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “For a person to be eligible to perform yajïa, he must
take birth as a brähmaëa. A brähmaëa must first receive the gäyatré-mantra and
brahminical thread, which is sävitra initiation, before he is allowed to perform
the different Vedic rituals. Similarly, a caëòäla, although purified by chanting
harinäma must first be born into a brähmaëa family before he is eligible to
conduct yajïa and the other Vedic rituals, which are readily available to him by
such a birth. However, the former caëòäla—purified by chanting harinäma—can
perform all the aìgas, limbs, of bhakti, which are infinitely greater than
yajïas.”

Cudamani, “This is a very strange siddhänta, conclusion. One who is denied
exercising an elementary right ends up having claim to a much superior position.
What simple proofs can you put forward?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Human activities can be categorized under two headings:
vyävahärika, mundane and social; and päramärthika, spiritual. There are
instances where a person is spiritually advanced, but is not allowed to perform
certain mundane, vyävahärika activities. For example, a person is born as a
Muslim, but acquires the qualities the sattva-guëa like a pure brähmaëa; in
fact, spiritually, he is a brähmaëa, yet he is barred from the vyävahärika act
of marrying a brähmaëa bride.”

Cüòämaëi, “Why is he not eligible? What will be his offence if he does?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “If one acts against social human norms, one commits a
social impropriety. Those who are proud of knowing the social etiquette will
never acquiesce to such impropriety. Therefore, in spite of päramärthika
eligibility, one should not go against the principles of general society.”

Cüòämaëi, “Kindly reiterate the necessary qualifications for performing karma
and for performing bhakti.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Vyävahärika qualifications such as a privileged birth and
one’s nature prepare one for performing tat-tat-karma-yogya-svabhäva-janma,
activities suitable to one’s social station, mentality, and birth. Faith,
devotion, and activities according to the ultimate scriptural
conclusions—bhakti-tattvika-çraddhä—bestow the eligibility to execute bhakti.”

Cüòämaëi, “Please do not try to confuse me with the theological jargon of the
Vedänta, but explain to me in prosaic terms what is meant by
tat-tat-karma-yogya-svabhäva-janma?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Çama, peacefulness through control of the senses; dama,
control of the mind; tapaù, austerity; çauca, purity; santoña, satisfaction;
kñamä, forgiveness; saralatä, simplicity, straight-forwardness; éça-bhakti,
devotion to Bhagavän; dayä, mercy and compassion; and satya, truthfulness, are
some qualifications which constitute the brahminical nature. 

“Çaurya, heroism; bala, physical power; tejä, physical prowess; dhåti, resolute
determination; titikñä, tolerance; udärata, generosity; udyama, perseverance,
enthusiasm; dhératä, gravity, steadfastness in leadership; brahmaëyatä, devotion
to the brähmaëas; and aiçvarya, opulence, are hallmarks of the kñatriya nature. 

“Ästikya, theistic religiosity; däna, charity; nisöùa, faithful dedication;
adämbhikatä, humility; artha-tåñëä, eagerness for wealth, are the nature of a
vaiçya. 

“Dvija-go-deva-sevä, serving the brähmaëas, the cow, the devas; and
yathä-läbha-santoña, satisfaction with whatever is obtained, are the
qualifications of a çüdra. 

“Äçaucam, unclean habits; mithyä, dishonesty; caurya, stealing; nästikatä,
atheism; våtha kalaha, quarrelling; käma, lust; krodha, anger; and
indriya-tåñëä, hankering to gratifying the senses, are the activities and
characteristics of the antyajas, outcastes. 

“The çästras recommend that a person’s varëa is ascertained by his guëa, nature,
and karma, activities, not solely by the assessment of his janma, birth, though
recently this has become the exclusive practice. A person’s guëa determines his
psychology and preferences, and ultimately his expertise in a particular kind of
work. Those svabhäva, individual natures, which I have just now enumerated,
prompt the corresponding tat-tat-karma-yogya-svabhäva. 

“Sometimes janma is the dominant factor in the development of a particular guëa,
and sometimes association after janma becomes the dominant factor. Association,
of course, begins at janma from which time one’s guëa is moulded, thus
indicating that janma is certainly a factor. However, janma cannot be deemed the
only factor when considering the eligibility for a particular karma. Such an
idea would be a great mistake for there are surely a variety of other reasons
and causes affecting one’s guëa and resultant eligibility. Therefore, the
çästras point out that eligibility for a particular karma must be ascertained
ultimately on the basis of one’s guëa.”

Cüòämaëi, “What is tattvika-çraddhä?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Simple, guileless faith in the Supreme Lord—and
consequently sincere bhakti rendered to Him—is known as tättivika-çraddhä.
Ätättvika-çraddhä, unreal false faith, in the Lord is developed in an impious
person’s heart when he performs only the external aspects and rituals of worship
and—out of pride and greed—uses this mask of religiosity to pursue his cherished
material goals. This kind of faith is misaligned with the directions of
scripture and is therefore designated atattvika-çraddhä. Many mahäjanas have
proclaimed that tattvika-çraddhä means sincere faith in the çästras. A sincere
candidate is given eligibility to perform bhakti by this tattvika-çraddhä.”

Cüòämaëi, “Some persons have developed faith in the çästras, but lack a noble
nature—are they fit candidates for bhakti?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “One’s type by nature, svabhäva, is certainly a deciding
factor in deciding the eligibility to carry out a particular karma, but svabhäva
is definitely not applicable to the eligibility to perform bhakti, which is
solely dependent upon tattvika-çraddhä. Kindly, deliberate upon the following
verses from the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 11.20.27-30, 32,33:

jäta-çraddho mat-kathäsu 
nirviëëaù sarva-karmasu
veda duùkhätmakän kämän 
parityäge ‘py anéçvaraù

tato bhajeta mäà prétaù 
çraddhälur dåòha-niçcayaù
juñamäëaç ca tän kämän 
duùkhodarkäàç ca garhayan

“‘Having awakened faith in the narrations of My glories by good association, and
being disgusted with all material activities, knowing that all sense
gratification leads to misery, but still being unable to renounce all sense
enjoyment, My devotee should remain happy and continue to hear, chant, and
worship Me with great faith and conviction. Even though My devotee is sometimes
engaged in sense enjoyment, he knows that all sense gratification leads to a
miserable result, and he sincerely repents such activities.’

proktena bhakti-yogena
bhajato mäsakån muneù
kämä hådayyä naçyanti
sarve mayi hådi sthite

“‘When an intelligent person engages constantly in worshiping Me through loving
devotional service as described by Me, his heart quickly becomes firmly situated
in Me. Thus, all material desires within the heart are destroyed.’

bhidyate hådaya-granthiç
chidyante sarva-saàçayäù
kñéyante cäsya karmäëi
mayi dåñöe ’khilätmani

“‘The knot in the heart is pierced, all misgivings are cut to pieces and the
chain of fruitive actions is terminated when I am seen as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.’

yat karmabhir yat tapasä
jïäna-vairägyataç ca yat
yogena däna-dharmeëa
çreyobhir itarair api

sarvaà mad-bhakti-yogena
mad-bhakto labhate ’ïjasä
svargäpavargaà mad-dhäma
kathaïcid yadi väïchati

“‘Everything that can be achieved by fruitive activities, penance, knowledge,
detachment, mystic yoga, charity, religious duties and all other means of
perfecting life is easily achieved by My devotee through loving service unto Me.
My devotees are free from all ambition, but if, somehow or other, My devotee
desires promotion to heaven, liberation, or residence in My abode, he easily
achieves such benedictions.’ 

“Arising from çraddhä, this is the progressive development of bhakti-yoga.”

Cüòämaëi, “What if I do not accept the authority of the Çrémad Bhägavatam?” 

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “We have simply presented the conclusion of all the
çästras. Çästra is one. Even if you do not accept the Bhägavatam, then the other
scriptures will harass you with the same conclusion. We do not need to refer to
many çästras, simply consider what the Gétä, a universally honoured text, has to
say. In fact, even the verse quoted by you at the onset of this discussion
contains the same valuable teachings—as we find in Bhagavad-gétä, 9.30-32:

api cet su-duräcäro 
bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavyaù 
samyag vyavasito hi saù

“‘Even if a person commits the most abominable action, if he is engaged in
devotional service, he is to be considered saintly because he is properly
situated in his determination.’

kñipraà bhavati dharmätmä
çaçvac-chäntià nigacchati
kaunteya pratijänéhi
na me bhaktaù praëaçyati

“‘He quickly becomes righteous and attains lasting peace. O son of Kunti,
declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes.’

mäà hi pärtha vyapäçritya
ye ’pi syuù päpa-yonayaù
striyo vaiçyäs tathä çüdräs
te ’pi yänti paräà gatim

“‘O son of Påthä, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth—women, vaiçyas (merchants) and çüdras (workers)—can attain the supreme
destination.’

“The purport of this is that a devotee who engages in bhakti, hearing topics of
Kåñëa consciousness, chanting harinäma, singing His glories with ananya-bhäk,
single-mindedness, even if he is addicted to many abominable, illicit
activities, which go against the scriptural injunctions, must be considered a
sädhu because he is on the righteous path being situated in devotional service.

“Three processes are mentioned in the scriptures: karma-käëòa, fruitive
activities within the varëäçrama system; jïäna-käëòa, empirical philosophy and
renunciation; and bhakti-käëòa, devotional service comprising of hearing
narrations about the Supreme Lord in saintly association and chanting harinäma
with sincere faith. Sometimes, these three methods can be channelled into one
application known as yoga, union with the Supreme, at which time they generally
become termed as either karma-yoga, jïäna-yoga, or bhakti-yoga, depending on the
stress and slant of the practice. When any one of these forms of yoga is
practiced by itself, their acolytes are called karma-yogis, jïäna-yogis, and
bhakti-yogis. A bhakti-yogi is the best of the three, because bhakti-yoga is
able to reward the yogi with unlimited benedictions by itself. You can
understand this point from the following verse in the Gétä, 6.47, which is cited
at the conclusion of the first of the three six-chapter sections of the Géta:

yoginäm api sarveñäà 
mad-gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà 
sa me yuktatamo mataù 

“‘And of all yogis, the one with great faith, who always abides in Me, thinks of
Me within himself, and renders transcendental loving service to Me—he is the
most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all. That is My
opinion.’

“It is imperative to understand the meaning in Bhagavad-gétä 9.31: 

…ksipram bhavati dharmatma... 

“‘One who is sincerely engaged in devotional service will have the worst of his
character flaws quickly rectified.’ 

“Dharma meekly follows bhakti everywhere. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the source of dharma, and He allows Himself to be easily conquered by bhakti.
Mäyä, who enslaves the jéva, is immediately dispelled when the Supreme Lord is
invited to occupy the throne in the heart of the jéva. No other method of
sädhana is needed or is as effective. As soon as the spiritual aspirant becomes
a bhakta, dharmic fervour suffuses his heart and steadily manifests all virtues.
When käma, lust for sense enjoyment, is uprooted, then peace and tranquillity
enter the heart. Therefore, the Lord boldly declares: 

…na me bhaktaù praëaçyati… 

“‘My devotee will never be vanquished.’ 

“A karmi and a jïäné are vulnerable—it is possible they may fall into bad
association while practising their individual disciplines, but the Lord’s
devotees are not attracted to associate with non-devotees in the first place.
This is solely because of the all-powerful direct association with the Supreme
Lord; therefore, the devotee can never be destroyed. Whether a devotee is born
in a lowly family of sinners, or in the noble brähmaëa caste, the supreme
destination is within his grasp.”

Cüòämaëi, “It appears to me that the rites and rituals prescribed by the
scriptures to the jéva on the basis of his birth are more satisfactory. I was
born in a brähmaëa family. By regular performance of my sandhyä, vandana, and so
on, I am sure to acquire jïäna and finally attain mukti. This is a tangible
truth to me, but I cannot comprehend how çraddhä appears. I have come across
instructions in the Gétä and Bhägavatam about how bhakti is begotten from
çraddhä. Kindly explain to me how the jéva may endeavour to possess that
çraddhä.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Çraddhä is an integral part of the eternal, inherent
nature of the jéva. The inclination of the jéva towards a particular karma in
the varëäçrama social system is a product of his naimittika-svabhäva, temporary,
assumed, material nature. This is substantiated in the scriptures, for example,
the Chändogya Upaniñad 7.19.1: 

yadä vai çraddadhäti atha manute, 
näçraddadhan manute,
çraddadhad eva manute, 
çraddhätveva vijijïäsitavyeti çraddhäà bhagavo vijijïäsa iti 

“‘Sanat-kumära said, “When a person develops çraddhä, respect for that which is
to be known, he makes the effort to comprehend that object. Only those with
çraddhä can know that object, others without çraddhä cannot. Therefore, O
Närada! First, there must be çraddhä, so it is essential to learn what is the
true nature of çraddhä.” Närada replied, “My dear Lord, I earnestly desire to
inform myself fully about çraddhä.’

“Some commentators have explained that çraddhä means faith in the words of the
Vedas and the çré-guru. This explanation is acceptable, but not clear. In our
sampradäya, the word çraddhä carries the following definition, Ämnäya-sütra, 57:


çraddhä tv anyopäya-varjaà bhakty-unmukhé citta-våtti-viçeñaù

“‘Çraddhä is that propensity in man which strives for bhakti, rejecting the
attainment of bhakti by the vehicles of karma, jïana, mystic yoga, and so on.’

“By constantly hearing about the Supreme Lord in saintly association, one’s
consciousness reaches a certain elevation. When one realizes that karma, jïana,
añtanga yoga, etc., cannot offer the jéva the eternal benediction of the
Absolute Truth, and that there is no other option for the jéva besides taking
shelter of the lotus feet of Çré Hari with single-minded bhakti, only then can
it be said that one has developed çraddhä and faith in the words of the çästra
and guru. 

“Çraddhä is further outlined in the following words of Ämnäya-sütra, 58: 

…sä ca çaraëäpatti-lakñaëä… 

“‘The different indications of surrender are the external symptoms of çraddhä.’ 

“Çaranägati, surrender, is described as follows in the Hari-bhakti-viläsa,
11.676:

änukülyasya saìkalpaù prätikülyasya varjanam
rakñiñyatéti viçväso goptåtve varaëaà tathä
ätma-nikñepa-kärpaëye ñaò-vidhä çaraëägatiù

“‘The six divisions of surrender are the acceptance of things favourable to the
execution of devotional service; the rejection of unfavourable things; the
conviction that Kåñëa will give protection; the acceptance of the Lord as one’s
guardian and master; full self-surrender; and humility.’

“Firstly, the devotee must take a saìkalpa, solemn vow, to perform works which
are änukülyasya saìkalpa, favourable to unalloyed bhakti. Secondly, the devotee
must take solemn vow in the matter of prätikülyasya varjanam, rejecting anything
that is unfavourable to unalloyed bhakti. Thirdly, He must be convinced that the
Supreme Lord alone is rakñiñyatéti viçväso, his protector and maintainer, and
that nothing positive can come from endeavouring for karma, jïäna, and yoga.
Thus the devotee expresses viçväsa, trust, in the Lord. Fourthly, the bhakta
must develop a sense of goptåtve varaëaà, complete dependence on the Lord,
thinking that his own efforts alone will never make him capable of succeeding in
anything, not even in physically maintaining himself. Therefore, since the Lord
is taking care of him, the bhakta will serve the Lord appropriately and as well
as he can. This is known as nirbharatä, dependence. Fifthly, the bhakta must
ätma-nikñepa, offer himself wholesale to the Lord, knowing that he is ignorant
of his own spiritual identity, that he is the Lord’s property, and that his
actions are the implementations of the desires of the Lord. This surrender of
the self is also known as ätmä-nivedana. Sixthly and finally, the bhakta must
develop the sense of kärpaëye, humility, which makes him feel poverty-stricken,
meek, and lowly. This mood of humility is understood as kärpaëya or dainya. 

“Thus the state of consciousness that is evoked when the heart becomes infused
with determination, subservience, trust, dependence, self-surrender, and
humility is designated as çraddhä. Whosoever attains this çraddhä becomes a fit
candidate to execute bhakti and for the sädhaka, devotional aspirant, this
çraddhä is the initial step towards the perfection displayed by the eternally
liberated pure jéva souls. Since çraddhä is the fundamental nuance of the jéva’s
nitya-svabhäva, innate eternal nature, it is therefore also his actual
nitya-dharma. All other variations of the dharma of the jéva are naimittika.”

Cüòämaëi, “Thank you, I have grasped your explanation. However, still you have
omitted the subject of what evokes çraddhä. If sat-karma, pious deeds, are the
seeds that later sprout out as çraddhä, then my argument remains uncontested;
because, if sat-karma and prescribed duties according to one’s varëa are not
properly executed within the varëäçrama system, then çraddhä cannot manifest
itself. Thus, since the yavanas, Muslims, do not have the possibility to perform
sat-karma, how can they become suitable candidates for practising bhakti?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Yes! Çraddhä is born of sukåti, righteous activities.
This quote, available in the Båhan-näradéya Puräëa, 4.33, provides the required
proof:

bhaktis tu bhagavad bhakta saìgena parijäyate
sat-saìgaù präpyate puàbhiù sukåtaiù pürva saïcitaiù 

“‘Devotional sentiments are evoked by the purifying association of advanced
devotees. The jéva is able to come into close contact with a çuddha-bhakta, pure
devotee, only by accruing sufficient sukåti from many previous births.’

“However, sukåti is of two kinds: nitya and naimittika. Sukåti, which leads to
sat-saìga and bhakti, is nitya-sukåti; and sukåti, which results in material
enjoyment and impersonal liberation, is naimittika-sukåti, otherwise known as
anitya-sukåti. Sukåti is differentiated on the basis of results—if the result is
eternal, sukåti is the eternal nitya-sukåti; and if the result is evanescent,
sukåti is the temporal naimittika-sukåti. Bhukti, sense gratification, is
fleeting; hence, that which produces bhukti is naimittika-sukåti.

“The jéva is in himself çuddha, pure; nitya, eternal; and sanätana, primeval and
ever dynamic. The cause of the enslavement of the jéva is his intimate
intercourse with mäyä, matter. Mukti, defined as the complete nullification of
this enslavement, is dependent upon cause and effect, and, being achieved in a
moment, is therefore a transitory and not an eternal action. When mukti is
attained all striving for mukti ceases immediately and is then no longer a topic
of discussion. Nevertheless, because of a lack of knowledge in this subject,
many people falsely believe that mukti is eternal. In reality, however, mukti is
actually only the removal of the material cause of bondage; therefore, it is
primarily naimittika. Therefore, that process of so-called bhakti, which claims
to generate mukti and then ceases to exist, is at best naimittika karma.

“On the other hand, that bhakti, which is present before the stage of mukti is
attained, while mukti is attained, and which remains forever after mukti has
been attained, is quite different from the bhakti described above—it is an
absolute eternal principle and is thus the nitya-dharma of the jéva. Attachment
to the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, Çré Hari, is endless and eternal. Hence,
in a spiritual sense, no aìga, limb, of this process of surrender can be termed
naimittika. What is called mukti is simply a by-product of this bhakti. I offer
this quotation from the Muëòaka Upaniñad, 1.2.12:

parékñya lokän karma-citän brähmaëo
nirvedam-äyän nästy akåtaù kåtena
tad-vijïänärthaà sa gurum eväbhigacchet
samit-päëiù çrotriyaà brahma-niñöham 

“‘A brähmaëa must realize the temporary nature of the results of karma, and that
the cherished eternal Absolute Truth, which lies beyond the principle of karma,
is unattainable through karma. Hence, he must denounce karma. In order to obtain
the cherished objective, he must attach himself to the science of bhakti. In
which case, he must humbly approach, with firewood for a sacrifice in hand, a
bona fide spiritual master who is well versed in the conclusions of the Vedas
and realized in the science of Kåñëa consciousness, and surrender there at his
feet with mind, body and words.’

“Karma-yoga, jïäna-yoga, añtanga-yoga, etc., are all in the category of
naimittika-sukåti. Whereas, bhakta-saìga, associating with saintly persons, and
bhakti-kriyä-saìga, contact with devotional acts, are nitya-sukåti. Only one who
has accrued nitya-sukåti over many lifetimes will attain çraddhä.
Naimittika-sukåti offers many other temporary results, but cannot evoke çraddhä,
leading to eternal unalloyed bhakti.”

Cüòämaëi, “Please explain, bhakta-saìga and bhakti-kriyä-saìga. From what type
of sukåti do these activities stem?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “To discuss and hear Kåñëa conscious topics from pure
devotees and to serve them is known as sat-saìga, also known as bhakta-saìga.
The pure devotees of the Lord perform the activities of bhakti such as the
congregational chanting of harinäma in towns and villages. A person who
participates in these spiritual activities or any other similar activities, such
as cleansing the Lord’s temple, offering a lamp to the tulasé plant, observing
the Hari-väsara, different spiritual festivals such as Ekädaçé and Janmäñöamé,
connected to the Supreme Lord, and so on, is performing bhakti-kriyä-saìga. 

“If somehow or other these activities are not executed with pure çraddhä, but
accidentally or even inattentively and hastily, still they result in sukåti that
fosters bhakti to the Supreme Lord. When this sukåti accumulates into a driving
force over many lifetimes, it brings one to the stage of acquiring çraddhä for
sädhu-saìga and anayä-bhakti, pure unalloyed bhakti. All the levels of purity
within bhakti add to the development of çraddhä; furthermore, only these
bhakti-kriyä, devotional activities, have the inherent potency to generate the
required sukåti. If they are executed with çraddhä, the results are marvellous,
but even when done disinterestedly or indifferently, they still increase piety
in the form of nitya-sukåti, as pointed out in the Mahäbhärata, Prabhäsa-kaëòha,
which is quoted in the Hari-bhakti-viläsa, 11.451:

madhura-madhuram-etan maìgalaà maìgalänäà
sakala-nigama-vallé-sat-phalaà cit-svarüpaà
sakåd api parigétaà çraddhayä helayä vä
bhågu-vara nara-mätraà tärayet kåñëa-näma

“‘The chanting of harinäma is the most beneficial of all spiritual and pious
activities. It is more relishable than the sweetest honey. It is the
transcendental fruit of all the çruti scriptures, the Vedas. O best of the
Bhärgavas! If any person chants harinäma offenselessly even once, be it with
çraddhä, or with derisive indifference, harinäma immediately offers him
liberation.’

“Thus, all sukåti which enhances one’s bhakti to the Lord is nitya-sukåti. This
form of sukåti leads to sädhu-saìga and ananya-bhakti when patiently seasoned.
Through performance of naimittika-duñköri, temporary impious deeds, the
wrongdoer may be born in a Muslim family, whereas a person performing
nitya-sukåti develops çraddhä leading to ananya-bhakti. Why should this come as
a surprise?”

Cüòämaëi, “If bhakti-poñaka-sukåti, sukåti that nourishes devotion, really
exists it can only be the result of some other type of sukåti. The yavanas do
not possess this other type of sukåti, so bhakti-poñaka-sukåti is beyond their
reach.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “One should not think in these terms. Nitya-sukåti and
naimittika-sukåti are independent of each other, not connected. In the Puräëas,
we find the story of the sinful hunter who unknowingly, by force of
circumstance, fasted and stayed up the night of çiva-rätré, thus performing a
çiva-vrata. He attained bhakti to Çré Hari as a result of this nitya-sukåti,
because Lord Çiva is a very elevated Vaiñëava. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
12.13.16, it is stated: 

vaiñëavänäà yathä çambhuù 

“‘Amongst all Vaiñëavas, Lord Çiva is the best.’

“Thus, even accidentally observing a vow in his honour enables one to attain
hari-bhakti. This is substantiated by all the scriptures.”

Cüòämaëi, “Are you claiming that nitya-sukåti can happen by chance, under force
of circumstance?” 

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Everything may be said to occur by force of circumstance;
this is true even on the path of karma. When the jéva was first entangled in the
cycle of karma, it happened suddenly, by sheer force of circumstances, did it
not? Although the mimäàsä philosophers have described karma as being anädi,
materially beginningless, factually karma has a cause. The jéva’s
bhagavad-vimukhatä, indifference, rejection, and turning away from the Lord, is
the root cause of his crucifixion upon the wheel of karma. Similarly,
nitya-sukåti may appear to have occurred by chance. 

“In the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad, 4.7, it is stated:

samäne våkñe puruño nimagno 
‘néçayä çocati muhyamänaù
juñöaà yadä paçyaty anyam 
éçamasya mahimänam iti véta-çokaù

“‘Although the two birds are in the same tree, the eating bird (the jéva), is
filled with anxiety and moroseness, and fully engrossed in enjoying the fruits
of the tree. Nevertheless, if somehow or other, he turns his face to his friend,
who is the Lord (the Supersoul), and knows His glories (by the mercy of the
guru) then at once, the suffering bird is freed from all anxiety.’

“The Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 10.51.53, states:

bhaväpavargo bhramato yadä bhavej
janasya tarhy acyuta sat-samägamaù
sat-saìgamo yarhi tadaiva sad-gatau
parävareçe tvayi jäyate ratiù

“‘O Acyuta! The jéva is eternally enthralled in the continuous cycle of birth
and death. By the mercy of the Lord, when the time for release from this vicious
circle arrives, he first attains the association of saintly persons. Right from
that moment, he develops attachment to Your lotus feet. You are the Lord of both
the material and the spiritual worlds and the shelter of the saintly souls.’

“Again from the Çrémad Bhägavatam, 3.25.25: 

satäà prasaìgän mama vérya-samvido
bhavanti håt-karëa-rasäyaëäù-kathäù
taj-joñaëäd äçv apavarga-vartmani
çraddhä ratir bhaktir anukramiñyati

“‘In the association of pure devotees, discussion of the potent pastimes and
activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is very pleasing and satisfying
to the ear and the heart. By cultivating such knowledge, one gradually becomes
advanced on the path of liberation, thereafter he is freed, and his attraction
becomes fixed. Then real devotion and devotional service begin.’”

Cüòämaëi, “Then, according to your understanding, there is no distinction
between one practising Vedic culture, an ärya, and a yavana?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “In general, there are two types of difference between
men: päramärthika, those of a spiritual nature; and vyävahärika, those of a
material nature. Between an ärya and a yavana, there are no absolute spiritual
differences, only mundane distinctions.”

Cüòämaëi, “Why must you always come up with lofty Vedic circumlocutions? What
may be these mundane vyävahärika distinctions between the ärya and the yavana?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Social intercourse in day-to-day material life is known
as vyävahärika. In a materialistic society, the yavana is considered an
untouchable. This is a mundane distinction and because of his low birth äryas
refuse water or food from his hands.”

Cüòämaëi, “If so, then clearly define how there is spiritual parity between an
ärya and a yavana?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “The scriptures declare: 

bhågu-vara nara-mätraà tärayet kåñëa-näma 

“‘O best of the Bhågu dynasty, the transcendental name of Kåñëa can liberate any
human being.’ 

“This means that all human beings, including the yavanas, are equal in respect
to their attaining spiritual goals. Those bereft of nitya-sukåti may be called
‘biped animals,’ because they have no faith in the transcendental name of Kåñëa.
Thus, although they are born as human beings, they are devoid of humanity, which
implies that their inhuman or animalistic nature is predominant. It is written
in the Mahäbhärata:

mahäprasäde govinde 
näma-brahmaëi vaiñëave
svalpa-puëyavatäà räjan 
viçväso naiva jäyate

“‘Persons with meagre sukåti cannot develop faith in mahä-prasäda, the spiritual
food remnants of the Lord; in the Deity of Çré Govinda, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; in the transcendental kåñëa-näma; and in the Vaiñëavas.’

“Nitya-sukåti bestows an immense piety that purifies the jéva. Naimittika-sukåti
is of meagre piety and cannot evoke çraddhä for spiritual objects. Mahä-prasäda,
Çré Kåñëa in His Deity form, harinäma, and the pure Vaiñëava devotee are the
four transcendental manifestations within this material world.”

At this point, Cüòämaëi said, with a short derisive laugh, “What a speech that
was! This is pure Vaiñëava fanaticism! How can a little rice, dal, vegetables,
and so on become cinmaya, transcendental? I am convinced that nothing is
impossible for you Vaiñëavas to believe in.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Whatever you may do, please do not attempt to criticize
or blaspheme the Vaiñëavas. This is my humble request. After all, in a debate
one must adhere to the topic at hand, not indulge in vaiñëava-nindä, blasphemy
of the Vaiñëavas. There is no object in the material world superior to
mahä-prasäda because it evokes the spiritual nature of man and dissipates the
mundane conditioning. Hence, the Çré Éçopaniñad, verse 1, declares:

éçäväsyam idaà sarvaà 
yat kiïca jagatyäà jagat
tena tyaktena bhuïjéthä 
mä gådhaù kasyasvid dhanam 

“‘Everything animate or inanimate that is within the universe is controlled and
owned by the Lord (is interwoven into the Lord’s existence and manifests His
consciousness). One should therefore accept only those things necessary for
himself (in a mood of yukta-vairägya) which are set aside as his quota, and one
must not accept other things, knowing well to whom they belong.’

“Everything in this world is connected with the Supreme Lord through His
energies. If one develops the vision that everything is related to the spiritual
nature, then one does not differentiate between what is spiritual and what is
material. Moreover, one stops trying to enjoy and exploit the material energy.
Those jévas, whose consciousness is directed inwards, towards spirituality,
should accept their daily bodily requirements in this world with the mood that
everything is the prasäda of the Lord. This is known as mahä-prasäda, great
mercy. That you cannot relish and appreciate such a wonderful thing as
mahä-prasäda is truly a great misfortune.

Cüòämaëi, “Please leave all that aside, let us remain on the subject. How are we
supposed to behave with the yavanas?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “As long as a person remains a yavana, we are indifferent
towards him. However, when the yavana becomes a Vaiñëava on the strength of his
nitya-sukåti, then we do not refer to him henceforward as a yavana. The
scriptures give this advice in the Padma Puräëa, which is also quoted in
Hari-bhakti-viläsa, 10.119:

çüdraà vä bhagavad-bhaktaà 
niñädaà çvapacaà tathä
vékñate jäti-sämänyät 
sa yäti narakaà dhruvam

“‘A devotee of the Supreme Lord may be born in a çüdra family, the last of the
four varëas, or lower as a niñada, an aboriginal hunter, or even in a caëòäla,
dog-eating family, but anyone who thinks that such a devotee is to be designated
according to his birth will certainly be doomed to hell.’

“In the Itihäsa-samuccaya, it is stated, as quoted in the Hari-bhakti-viläsa,
10.127:

na me priyaç catur-vedi 
mad-bhaktaù çvapacaù priyaù
tasmai deyaà tato grähyaà 
sa ca püjyo yathä hy aham

“‘If a brähmaëa, well-versed in the four Vedas (a caturvedi) is not a devotee,
he is not dear to Me, but if a person, though born in a caëòäla family, is a
devotee then he is very dear to Me. Whatever offering that has to be made must
be made to him with proper faith. His remnants must be accepted by all, knowing
him to be worthy of everyone’s worship just as I am.’” 

Cüòämaëi, “I understand. Can a gåhastha-vaiñëava offer the hand of his daughter
in marriage to a yavana-vaiñëava and can the yavana-vaiñëava in turn accept the
hand in marriage of the daughter of a gåhastha-vaiñëava?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “For the world of materialistic society a yavana remains a
yavana until his death, but in spiritual life when a yavana attains bhakti, he
is no longer to be regarded a yavana. The ten prescribed duties, saàskäras, are
smarta activities and viväha, marriage, is one of them. Hence, if the
gåhastha-vaiñëava is an ärya, belonging to one of the four varëas, then he
should only marry into his own varëa. Although the varëäçrama dharma is a part
of naimittika-karma, he should follow its principles, in order to lead a proper
household life. 

“It is not true that one becomes a Vaiñëava simply by discarding the social
rules and etiquette of varëäçrama dharma. For a Vaiñëava, anything that is
favourable towards the path of bhakti becomes his duty. Only when a person
develops genuine detachment from varëäçrama dharma by progress in hari-bhajana
will he be eligible to disassociate himself from it. Then, he must reject the
varëäçrama system and everything associated with it entirely.

“If, to a faithful Muslim, his own yavana society proves spiritually
detrimental, then he may renounce it without hesitation. If two persons are
Vaiñëavas, one of which has renounced varëäçrama-dharma and the other has
renounced yavana society, ultimately what is the difference? Both have rejected
the vyavahära, materialistic norms. In the pursuit of paramärtha, spiritual
reality, they are brothers. 

“However, this is not applicable to gåhastha-vaiñëava society. Domestic society
may place hindrances in the gåhastha’s path of bhajana; however, until he gains
the full eligibility to reject the norms of varëäçrama society, he should not do
so. Gradually, when he spontaneously develops firm and steady attachment to
practices that are beneficial to his spiritual bhajana, then he may forget his
dependence on social etiquette. For example, in the Çrémad Bhägavatam, 11.11.32:


äjïäyaivaà guëän doñän 
mayädiñöän api svakän
dharmän santyajya yaù sarvän 
mäà bhajet sa tu sattamaù 

“‘The Supreme Lord said, “My devotee perfectly understands that the ordinary
religious duties prescribed by Me in various Vedic scriptures possess favorable
qualities that purify the performer, and he knows that neglect of such duties
constitutes a discrepancy in one’s life. However, having taken complete shelter
at My lotus feet, a saintly person ultimately renounces such ordinary religious
duties and worships Me alone. He is thus considered the best amongst all living
entities.’

“Further, the Bhagavad-gétä, 18.66, states:

sarva-dharmän parityajya 
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo 
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù 

“‘Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver
you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.’

“Elsewhere, the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 4.29.46, states:

yadä yasyänugåhëäti 
bhagavän ätma-bhävitaù
sa jahäti matià loke 
vede ca pariniñöhitäm 

“‘When a person is fully engaged in bhakti, he is favoured by the Lord, who
bestows His causeless mercy. At such a time, the awakened devotee gives up all
material activities and ritualistic performances mentioned in the Vedas.’”

Cüòämaëi, “If a yavana sincerely embraces Vaiñëavism, will you sit together with
him and eat?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Impartial, detached Vaiñëavas can sit with him and honour
mahä-prasädam. In the context of ordinary social dealings, gåhastha-vaiñëavas
may not sit together with him, but there is no such objection when it comes to
honoring viñëu-prasäda. In fact, they are duty-bound to sit together.”

Cüòämaëi, “Then, why are the yavana-vaiñëavas prohibited from touching the Deity
paraphernalia in a Vaiñëava temple Deity room?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “It is offensive to call a Vaiñëava ‘yavana,’ only because
he is born in a yavana family. Every single Vaiñëava has the right to serve the
Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa. If a gåhastha-vaiñëava, in serving the Deities, acts
contrary to the precepts of varëäçrama dharma, he is found guilty only of
transgressing the rules of social etiquette. For the nirapekña-vaiñëava in the
renounced order, Deity worship is not recommended because nirapekñatä, being
free from all external requirements, is recommended. The nirapekña-vaiñëava
should serve the Divine Couple, Çré Rädhä and Her beloved Çré Kåñëa, in
mänasi-sevä, internal meditation.”

Cüòämaëi, “I see. Now please tell me what you think of the brähmaëas?” 

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “There are two types of brähmaëas: svabhäva-siddha, by
qualification; and jäti-siddha, by birth only. The brähmaëas by qualification
are close to being Vaiñëavas and should be respected by all; whereas, a brähmaëa
by birth is to be given the conventional social respect of mundane society. In
this way, the Vaiñëavas respect both. The scripture, Çrémad Bhägavatam, 7.9.10,
comments on this point:

vipräd dvi-ñaò-guëa-yutäd aravinda-näbha-
pädäravinda-vimukhät çvapacaà variñöham
manye tad-arpita-mano-vacanehitärtha-
präëaà punäti sa kulaà na tu bhürimänaù 

“‘If a brähmaëa has all twelve brahminical qualifications (as they are stated in
the books called, Sanat-sujäta) but is not a devotee and is averse to the lotus
feet of the Lord, he is certainly lower than a devotee who was born as a
dog-eater, but who has now dedicated everything—mind, words, activities, wealth,
and life—to the Supreme Lord. Such a devotee is better than such a brähmaëa
because the devotee can purify his whole family, whereas the so-called brähmaëa
in his position of false prestige cannot purify even himself.’

Cüòämaëi, “The lower castes, such as the çüdras, are not allowed to study the
Vedas. Can a çüdra who has become a Vaiñëava scrutinize the Vedas?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “He may come from any varëa, but if a person is a pure
Vaiñëava, he automatically becomes a transcendental brähmaëa. The Vedas are
broadly divided into two sections: that section which directs the performance of
karma, prescribed duties within varëäçrama dharma; and that section which
exhorts the tattva, the Absolute Truth. Mundane brähmaëas have only access to
the former section of the Vedas, explaining karma and so on; while, the
transcendental brähmaëas are fit candidates to study the latter section
describing the Absolute Truth. Regardless of a pure Vaiñëava’s background, he is
worthy of studying and teaching the essence, the Absolute Truth, from the Vedas.
This is substantiated in the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad, 4.4.21:

tam eva dhéro vijïäya prajïäà kurvéta brähmaëaù 

“‘An intelligent, equipoised person who has realized Brahman must endeavour to
know the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, and surrender unto
Him with loving devotion.’

“In the same Upaniñad, 3.8.10, it is stated:

yo vä etad akñaraà gärgy aviditväsmäl lokät praiti sa kåpanaù
atha ya etad akñaraà gärgi viditväsmäl lokät praiti sa brähmaëaù

“‘O Gärgi! Those who pass away from this mortal world without the knowledge of
the infallible Supreme Personality of Godhead are very impious, lowly
destitutes, and terrible misers; and those who have realized the
transcendentally situated Supreme Lord, exit from this material world as
brähmaëas.’

“Manu offers this comment referring to the mundane brähmaëas, in the Manu-småti,
2.168:

yo ‘nadhétya dvijo vedam anyatra kurute çramam
sa jévann eva çüdratvam äçu gacchati sänvayaù

“‘The twice-born brähmaëa, dvija, who after receiving the sacred thread does not
immerse himself in the study of the Vedas, but busies himself with less
important texts and subject matters will very soon in this lifetime, along with
his family, acquire the lowly qualities of a çüdra.’

“The Vedas have clearly defined the characteristics of a deserving candidate who
can delve into the essence of the Vedas. The Çvetäçvataropaniñad, 6.27, states:

yasya deve parä bhaktir 
yathä deve tathä gurau
tasyaite kathitä hy arthäù 
prakäçante mahätmanaù

“‘Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the
spiritual master are all the imports of Vedic knowledge automatically revealed.’

“The word parä-bhakti indicates çuddha-bhakti. I do not wish to delve deeper
into this topic, if need be you can research further. To put it in a nutshell:
Those who have developed çraddhä in the process of ananya-bhakti are suitable
candidates to scrutinize the sections of the Vedas propounding the highest
tattva, the essence of the Vedas. As for the great souls who have attained
ananya-bhakti and have thus been crowned with kåñëa-prema, they are qualified as
the exemplary propounders of this absolute knowledge, the conclusion of the
Vedas.”

Cüòämaëi, “Have you already concluded that the second section of the Vedas,
dealing with the tattva, the Absolute Truth, only supports the teachings of
vaiñëava-dharma and no other theology?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “There is but only one dharma without plurality,
designated as nitya-dharma, which is also called vaiñëava-dharma. The different
religious instructions of naimittika-dharma are like the ascending steps of the
ladder of vaiñëava-dharma. The Supreme Lord Himself declares in the Çrémad
Bhägavatam, 11.14.3:

kälena nañöä pralaye 
väëéyaà veda-samjïitä
mayädau brahmaëe proktä 
dharmo yasyäà mad-ätmakaù 

“‘The Supreme Lord said, “O Uddhava! Those instructions that propound the
eternal dharma that inspires attachment to Me are compiled in the Vedas. By the
ravages of time (pralaya) they seem to be lost; I will again instruct Brahmä at
the beginning of creation with the same knowledge of the Vedas.’

“The Kaöhopaniñad, 1.2.15, states:

sarve vedä yat padam ämananti 
tapäàsi sarväëi ca yad vadanti
yad icchanto brahmacaryaà caranti
tat te padaà saìgraheëa bravémi
auà ity etat

“‘The Supreme Being, whom the Vedic literature pre-eminently describes as the
supreme object of attainment, is Çré Viñëu, about whom, however, I will speak
only in brief. All austerities have been ordained for performance for the
purpose of His pleasure and satisfaction. To attain Him the brahmacärés go to
the abode of their guru and, maintaining celibacy, study the Vedas. That Supreme
Absolute Truth is manifested by the sound auà.’

“Furthermore, the Kaöhopaniñad, 1.3.9, states:

vijïäna-särathir yas tu 
manaù pragrahavän naraù
so’dhvanaù param äpnoti
tad viñëoù paramaà padam

“‘One who possesses vijïäna, realization of the Lord, as his charioteer, and who
thus maintains a steady control of the mind, which is like the reins that
control the horses of the bodily senses, crosses this material reality and
attains the supreme abode of Çré Viñëu, who is the omnipresent Supersoul known
as Väsudeva.’

“There are many further evidences in the Vedas,” concluded Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé.


At this point in the discussion, the faces of Devédäsa Vidyäratna and his
friends were looking decidedly pinched and dry and the enthusiasm of the
brähmaëa, Kåñëa Cüòämaëi, seemed to be flagging. It was already five in the
afternoon and the unanimous decision of the congregation was to halt the debate.
The brähmaëa paëòitas got up from their seats and took leave of the Vaiñëavas,
unhesitating in their praise of the depth of Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé’s erudition.
Loudly glorifying harinäma, the Vaiñëavas dispersed to their individual
dwellings.

Thus ends the sixth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma: Birth and
Caste Differences

JDH 7: Nitya-dharma and Saàsära, Material Existence 

Chapter Seven
 Nitya-dharma and Saàsära, Material Existence 

The ancient township of Saptagräma with its predominant mercantile class is
situated upon the banks of the holy River Sarasvaté. For hundreds of years, many
thousands of gold traders and jewellers had lived there. However, since the time
of Çré Uddhäraëa Datta, this trading society had by the mercy of Çré Nityänanda
practiced with deep sincerity the congregational chanting of harinäma. 

Yet, presently, a certain wealthy but miserly trader, Caëòédäsa Vanik, had
refused to join the congregational chanting, being afraid of a possible increase
in his expenses. Similarly, his wife, Damayanté devé, who had also become
infected with the parsimonious tendencies of her husband, never invited guests
nor served the Vaiñëavas. 

The couple had four sons and two daughters from early in their marriage.
Gradually, they had settled the daughters by marriage and were now keeping aside
immense savings for the sons. In a household that is not visited by Vaiñëavas
the family members, especially the children, easily lose their charitable
disposition. And so, as Caëòédäsa’s children had grown older, they had become
most selfish. In fact, they had become so greedy for the wealth of their parents
that they now began to wish them dead. The worries and pain of Caëòédäsa and
Damayanté knew no end.

Gradually, Caëòédäsa and Damayanté found suitable brides for their sons and
launched them into household life. However, the daughters-in-law, as a result of
close association with their husbands, also adopted self-centered ways and soon
also desired the quick demise of their parents-in-law. Having become capable of
handling the business independently of their aging parents and soon managing all
the shop transactions themselves, the sons gradually divided most of their
father’s wealth amongst themselves.

One day, Caëòédäsa called his family together. He said, “Listen! I was able to
save a great deal of money for you all by being thrifty. Your mother and I were
never extravagant in regard to our own lifestyle, eating, or dress. As we are
now approaching old age, it is actually your duty to serve and care for us, but
I notice that you are not looking after us properly, which is causing us great
pain and suffering. Therefore, I have hidden a fair amount of wealth, which I
will give to the one who is obedient to me.”

The sons and daughters listened mutely to their father’s monotonous monologue,
finally dispersing and meeting clandestinely somewhere else later. There they
conspired to send their parents far away, confiscate the hidden wealth, and
share it amongst themselves. They were concerned that out of sentimentality
their father might eventually donate his money to some undeserving person
outside the family. They were convinced that their parents had buried the
treasure in a secret place in their bedroom and that to take the treasure away
from them was the most sensible decision. 

One morning, Haricaraëa, the eldest of the sons, approached his father and
feigning concern and humility suggested, “Why don’t you and our beloved mother
visit at least once the holy place of pilgrimage, Navadvépa-dhäma, and thus
fulfil the purpose of your human birth? I have heard that in Kali-yuga no other
place of pilgrimage is as auspicious as Navadvépa-dhäma. The journey to
Navadvépa-dhäma is quite inexpensive; if you cannot travel on foot, a passenger
boat can be easily hired to take you upstream for a few pence. There’s even a
vaiñëavé, Vaiñëava lady, who wants to accompany you.”

Caëòédäsa informed his wife about the proposal, waiting for her advice.
Damayanté devé was overcome with joy, so they made plans together, “Our earlier
talk has had a positive effect upon our sons. Actually, we are not too old to
walk to Navadvépa. Let us take the route that will take us through Kälnä and
Çäntipura.” Consulting the religious almanac, they picked an auspicious date and
started their pilgrimage, taking the vaiñëavé with them. They arrived in Kälnä
the next day, where they found a guesthouse, cooked, and were just beginning
their meal when a traveller from their hometown walked in. Recognizing them, he
broke the harsh news, “Your sons have broken open your room and grabbed all of
your possessions, plus they have looted and shared out your secret savings. Now
both of you are no longer welcome in your own house!”

News of the loss delivered a terrible blow to Damayanté and Caëòédäsa. They fell
into dismal, grey melancholy. Their food lay half eaten and forgotten as tears
of self-pity soaked their frail frames. Meanwhile, their companion, the
vaiñëavé, tried to console them with sensible spiritual advice, she said, “Do
not be so attached to home and hearth. Come, let us continue on to Navadvépa and
become mendicants. We can build a small äçrama for Vaiñëavas and beg food for
sustenance. Such a life is better than to go back to those who have become so
evil and inimical to you—even though you have done so much for them.”

Caëòédäsa and his wife, still under the shock of the atrocious behaviour of
their sons and daughters-in-law, began repeating, “We will not return to them,
better to die!” Thinking in this way, they stayed in Ambikä-gräma in the house
of a Vaiñëava for a few days. From there, they went to see Çäntipura and then
toured all the places of Navadvépa, eventually staying in Mäyäpura in the home
of a merchant relative. Then they visited the seven localities of Kuliyä-gräma,
which is situated on the opposite bank of the Gaìgä to Navadvépa. However, after
this lengthy time of travelling, they began to feel homesick and affection for
their sons and family began to well up in their hearts.

Caëòédäsa said, “Come, let us return to our Saptagräma. Is it possible that our
own sons will not show us any affection?” Their vaiñëavé companion quickly
retorted, “Have you no pride? This time they will definitely murder you.” Her
words had a sobering effect upon the couple, and they realized that most likely
she was speaking the truth. Caëòédäsa turned to her, saying, “My dear respected
lady, you have made us wise to the stark reality, please return to your home—we
will remain here and find a proper spiritual guide. Taking instruction from him,
we will live our lives humbly by begging.”

The vaiñëavé left them and returned home. Abandoning all hope of a return to
their home, the mercantile couple, Damayanté devé and Caëòédäsa, plunged
themselves into the task of building a small dwelling in the village of Kuliyä
on a property owned by one Chakauré Caööopädhyäya. They went around soliciting
help from the village gentry, constructed a hut, and began to live there.

Kuliyä-gräma is a holy place. It was common knowledge that if one resided there
all one’s previous sins and offences would be exonerated. Therefore, it was
known as aparädha-bhaïjana-pät, the place that absolves offences. 

One day, Caëòédäsa told his wife, “O mother of Hari! Is it not high time that we
stopped talking or even thinking about our children? We must have committed many
sinful activities to have taken birth in the families of merchants. Influenced
by our association and surroundings, we were always stingy and never hospitable
either to guests or to Vaiñëava sädhus. Now, if we can earn some money here, we
should try to be generous and hospitable and serve the sädhus. This will ensure
for us a better birth in the next life. I have decided to open a grocery store
and will borrow some money from the landlord to start the business.”

A few days later, Caëòédäsa opened a small shop and soon he began profiting from
the sales. So, after satisfying their own hunger and needs, the couple could
feed at least one guest every day. Caëòédäsa now happily foresaw an end to his
days of struggle. Having had some previous education, he spent his leisure time
in the grocery shop reading a book called Çré Kåñëa-vijaya by Çré Guëaräja Khän.
For six months, he ran his business honestly and hosted guests daily. By then
the residents of Kuliyä-gräma had become acquainted with Caëòédäsa’s background
and looked upon him with a new respect.

Yädava däsa, a gåhastha-vaiñëava, was also living in that village. Every day, he
held a public reading of the famous biographical work on the pastimes of Çré
Caitanya, called the Çré Caitanya-bhägavata, which Caëòédäsa would sometimes
attend. Yädava däsa and his wife had dedicated their lives to serving the
Vaiñëavas, and now Caëòédäsa and his wife, being inspired by this example, also
began to serve the Vaiñëavas. 

One day, Caëòédäsa enquired of Yädava däsa, “What is this saàsära, material
existence?” Yädava däsa replied, “The holy island of Godrumadvépa on the other
side of the Gaìgä shelters many knowledgeable Vaiñëavas. Let us both go there
and place this question to them. Many times previously, I have been there for
spiritual education and at present, the Vaiñëava scholars of Godrumadvépa are
known to be much more learned in the scriptures than the brähmaëa paëòitas.
Everyone knows that recently the brähmaëa paëòitas received a good thrashing
from the hands of one Çré Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé in a scriptural debate. So
definitely the Vaiñëavas will be able to properly answer your question.” 

Yädava däsa and Caëòédäsa decided to cross the Gaìgä the next day and visit the
Vaiñëavas. Damayanté devé, whose miserliness had disappeared by regularly
serving the Vaiñëavas, said, “I would like to accompany you both to
Godrumadvépa.”

Yädava däsa replied, “None of the Vaiñëavas there is a gåhastha; they are mostly
renounced Vaiñëavas who have left their homes. I am worried that if you come
they may be disturbed.”

Damayanté insisted, “I will remain at a respectable distance and from there
offer my obeisances to them. I will not enter inside their kuïja, grove. I am
just an old lady; certainly they will not be angry.” 

Yädava däsa replied, “Yes, it is not customary for a woman to enter their kuïja.
You should remain at another place close by and on our way back we can all
return together.”

It was three in the afternoon when they alighted from the ferry-boat and
proceeded towards Pradyumna-kuïja. Damayanté devé offered her praëämas,
obeisances, from the entrance of the kuïja and went away to sit at a distance
under a shady old banyan tree. Yädava däsa and Caëòédäsa entered the kuïja and
offered their daëòavat-praëämas with sincere devotion to the assembly of
Vaiñëavas seated upon the Çré Mädhavé-mälaté Maëòapa. Çré Paramahaàsa Bäbäjé was
sitting there, surrounded by Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, Lähiré Mahäçaya, Ananta däsa
Bäbäjé, and many others. Yädava däsa and Caëòédäsa came near and quietly sat
down next to them.

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé questioned, “Who is this new person?” Yädava däsa explained
the recent history of Caëòédäsa and the reason for their visit. Ananta däsa
Bäbäjé spoke out with a touch of humour, “Ah yes! This is actually saàsära! One
who has understood what saàsära means is intelligent and he who is swirling
unknowingly in the whirlpool of saàsära is pitiable.”

Nitya-sukåti unfailingly brings great spiritual benediction and Caëòédäsa’s
consciousness had been becoming purified gradually through his recent
activities. Serving Vaiñëavas, reading Vaiñëava literature, hearing spiritual
topics are all nitya-sukåti, and by performing these activities the heart is
cleansed and faith in pure devotional service is easily evoked. This being
Caëòédäsa’s present condition as Ananta däsa Bäbäjé spoke his heart softened and
he enquired, “My humble prayer is that you may kindly enlighten me about the
true nature of saàsära.” 

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “Caëòédäsa, your question is somewhat difficult. I would
rather enquire from Çré Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé or Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé.”

Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé responded, “Ananta däsa Bäbäjé’s capacity is equal
to the gravity of this question. Today we will receive spiritual instruction
from him.”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé started, “Now that I have the approval of the assembly to
speak, I will most certainly say everything within my knowledge. At the very
outset, I meditate upon the lotus-feet of my Gurudeva, Çréla Pradyumna
Brahmacäré who is an eternal associate of the Supreme Lord and beg for his
blessings. 

“There are two distinctive conditions of the jéva: he is either liberated, or,
otherwise, he is entangled in material life, saàsära. The liberated jéva is a
pure devotee of Kåñëa who has never come under the sway of mäyä, or
alternatively he has transcended the material nature by the mercy of Çré Kåñëa
and is now in the liberated situation.

“One who has turned away from Kåñëa and denied his relationship with Him falls
into the clutches of mäyä; thus he is in entangled in saàsära from a time
without beginning. The liberated jéva, on the other hand, being fully engaged in
service to Kåñëa is transcendentally situated. He is not located in the material
nature but is an eternal resident of one of the transcendental, spiritual
abodes—such as Goloka, Vaikuëöha, and Våndävana. There are an unlimited number
of liberated souls. 

“The number of the materially entangled souls is also endlessly numerous. Since
they have rejected Kåñëa, mäyä, the illusory energy and shadow potency of Kåñëa,
has imprisoned them in the mundane nature by covering them with the three
material guëas: sattva, goodness; rajaù, passion; and tamaù, ignorance.
Diversity in the material condition of the jévas is a result of the varying
intensities and combinations of these three guëas. These variations are evident
in the jévas’ physiognomy, mentality, habits, geographical situations, speed of
movement, physical capability, and so on. 

“In his pure state, the self-cognition of the jéva is ‘I am an eternal servant
of Kåñëa.’ However, upon entering the mundane plane each jéva adopts false
identities throughout his many different lives and thus perceives himself in so
many changing roles—‘I am a human being,’ ‘I am a deva,’ ‘I am an animal,’ ‘I am
a king,’ ‘I am a brähmaëa,’ ‘I am a caëòäla,’ ‘I am a sick man,’ ‘I am a hungry
man,’ ‘I am a insulted person,’ ‘I am a benefactor,’ ‘I am a husband,’ ‘I am a
wife,’ ‘I am a son,’ ‘I am an enemy,’ ‘I am a friend,’ ‘I am a scholar,’ ‘I am
handsome,’ ‘I am rich,’ ‘I am poor,’ ‘I am happy,’ ‘I am sad,’ ‘I am
courageous,’ ‘I am weak,’ and so on, endlessly. These false identities are known
as ahaìkära, false egoism. There is also a further covering energy, which is
known as mamatä, attachment. This compels the jéva to identify himself as the
possessor of material objects and persons. This is illustrated with such
concepts as ‘This is my house,’ ‘These are my possessions,’ ‘This is my body,’
‘This is my caste,’ ‘This is my race,’ ‘This is my strength,’ ‘These are my
looks,’ ‘These are my qualities,’ ‘This is my education,’ ‘This is my
renunciation,’ ‘This is my knowledge,’ ‘These are my achievements,’ ‘This is my
wealth,’ ‘These are my servants,’ etc., etc. So this massive intricate net woven
by the false concepts of ‘me’ and ‘mine’ is, in a word, saàsära.”

Yädava däsa, “In the conditioned imprisoned material existence, ‘me’ and ‘mine’
are certainly prominent within the consciousness of the jéva. Do they remain in
the liberated state of the jéva?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “In the liberated condition, the concepts of ‘me’ and ‘mine’
are purely spiritual and free of all material inebriety. When in transcendence,
the jéva identifies himself with his pure self, which is the constitutional
nature bestowed upon him by Çré Kåñëa. On the liberated spiritual platform,
there are innumerable identities of ‘me’ that are the real egotism of the jéva.
And being thus established as the servitors of Çré Kåñëa, the jévas experience
the many varieties of cit-rasa, spiritual mellow. The numerous ingredients that
comprise this cit-rasa inspire a sense of ‘wanting to be the possessor,’ from
which the spiritual concept of ‘mine’ develops.”

Yädava däsa, “Then why is it a mistake to expand to such a wide range of ‘me’
and ‘mine’ in the conditioned state?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “In the pure state, ‘me’ and ‘mine’ are absolute realities,
they have factual existence; but in saàsära, all varieties of ‘me’ and ‘mine’
are false and artificially imposed. They do not represent the true self of the
jéva; rather, they are transitory illusory identifications. All such myriad
identities in saàsära are temporary and artificial and as such are the cause of
the transient mundane joys and sorrows.”

Yädava däsa, “Is material saàsära a falsity?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “This material world is not false, it is factual—by Çré
Kåñëa’s will. However, it is the materially conditioned jéva’s concepts of ‘me’
and ‘mine’ that are false and illusory. Moreover, the very instant that the jéva
enters this mundane nature, his problematic false self-identity begins. The
mäyävädé speculators wrongly claim that this world is an illusion; therefore,
they must be seen as offenders.”

Yädava däsa, “Why does the jéva pursue these false identifications?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “Bhagavän is the pürëa-cid-vastu, complete spiritual being,
and the jéva is an infinitesimal cid-vastu, spiritual spark. Initially, the jéva
was situated on the borderline between the material and spiritual worlds. From
this location, those jévas who did not forget their relationship to Çré Kåñëa
became fortified with the cit-çakti, spiritual energy, and were attracted into
the spiritual realm. Thus, they entered the transcendental abodes of Çré Kåñëa
and became engrossed in His service as His eternal associates, simultaneously
experiencing divine ecstasy.

“Meanwhile, those jévas who desired to enjoy the material world separately from
Çré Kåñëa, thus rejecting Him, were automatically dragged down by mäyä and cast
into the prison house of saàsära. Since the moment of entrance into the material
world, the jéva has lost his true spiritual identity and has become overtaken by
the false pride of material identity—he thinks himself as the lord of all he
surveys and maintains other such misconceptions.” 

Yädava däsa, “Why do we fail to awaken our real original identity, despite all
our attempts?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “Human spiritual endeavour may be divided into two
categories: appropriate and inappropriate. If appropriate endeavours are made,
they will definitely remove our false pride and false egoism. However, on the
other hand, how can one expect positive results from inappropriate endeavours?”

Yädava däsa, “Kindly enumerate the inappropriate endeavours.”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “To follow the karma-käëòa methodology, thinking that such
practice will cleanse the consciousness, enlighten one with the non-dual Brahman
realization, which will then in turn eradicate mäyä, is an example of
inappropriate endeavour. Another example is to try through the eight-fold yoga
system, known as añtanga-yoga, to enter transcendental samädhi, this is almost
impossible. There are many other inappropriate endeavours of this type.”

Yädava däsa, “Why these attempts are considered inappropriate?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “They are inappropriate because trying to reach the goal
through these endeavours actually creates further obstacles upon the path,
making success very difficult and probably impossible. Our material entanglement
has begun from our offence to the Supreme Lord; thus, the only way to liberate
ourselves from this fallen condition is to remove this initial offence and try
to invoke the mercy of the Supreme Lord. In this way, we can be released from
illusion and earn back our pure spiritual identity.”

Yädava däsa, “What then is called appropriate endeavour?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “Sadhu-saìga, association with saintly persons, and
prapatti, surrender, are the proper means. Sadhu-saìga has been described in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 11.2.30, as follows:

ata ätyantikaà kñemaà
påcchämo bhavato ’naghäù
saàsäre ’smin kñaëärdho ’pi
sat-saìgaù çevadhir nåëäm 

“‘O sinless Åñis! Direct perception of the Supreme Lord is very rarely attained,
therefore I ask you to tell me what is of the utmost benefit to humanity? After
all, even half a moment of association with saintly souls within this saàsära,
cycle of birth and death, is a priceless treasure for any man.’

“Prapatti is described in the Bhagavad-gétä 7.14:

daivé hy eñä guëa-mayé
mama mäyä duratyayä
mäm eva ye prapadyante
mäyäm etäà taranti te 

“‘This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature,
is very difficult to overcome. However, those who have surrendered unto Me can
easily cross beyond it.’”

Caëòédäsa, “My dear devotee, I am unable to grasp the full import of your words.
So far I have understood that we, the jévas, were originally pure, but by
forgetting Kåñëa we have fallen into mäyä’s clutches—and this has made us
prisoners in this world. If we receive the mercy of Kåñëa we can find release,
otherwise we will remain in this conditioned state.”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “Very true and now begin to strengthen your faith in this
truth. Your teacher Yädava däsa is able to comprehend this knowledge. You can
educate yourself gradually by associating with him. Çréla Jagadänanda Paëòita,
an intimate and prominent associate of Çré Caitanya, has written the following
lines in his book Çré Prema-Vivarta:

cit-kaëa—jéva, kåñëa—cin-maya bhäskara
nitya kåñëe dekhi—kåñëe karena ädara

“‘The living entities are infinitesimal parts of the Supreme Absolute Truth, and
Çré Kåñëa is that Supreme Absolute Personality, transcendental and effulgent.
When the living entities realize that Çré Kåñëa is the eternal and absolute
controller, they engage in His loving devotional service.’

kåñëa-bahirmukha haïä bhoga-väïchä kare
nikaöa-stha mäyä täre jäpaöiyä dhare

“‘When the living entity desires to enjoy separately from Kåñëa and turns away
from Him, the illusory potency of the Lord, mäyä, immediately takes the soul in
her clutches.’ 

piçäcé päile jena mati-cchana haya
mäyä-grasta jévera haya se bhäva udaya

“‘Being mäyä’s captive, he becomes bewildered, acting like someone possessed by
a witch.’ 

ämi siddha kåñëa däsa, ei kathä bhule
mäyära naphara haïä cira-dina bule

“‘The jéva soul, having forgotten his constitutional position as the eternal
perfect and pure servant of Kåñëa, remains mäyä’s slave while going from one
body to the next.’ 

kabhu räjä, kabhu prajä, kabhu vipra, çüdra
kabhu duùkhé, kabhu sukhé, kabhu kéöa kñudra

“‘The jéva goes through many births, sometimes being born as a king, sometimes
as an ordinary citizen, sometimes as a brähmaëa, and sometimes as a çüdra.
Sometimes he is suffering, and sometimes he is happy. Sometimes he is born as an
insect.’ 

kabhu svarge, kabhu martye, narake vä kabhu
kabhu deva, kabhu daitya, kabhu däsa, prabhu

“‘Sometimes he goes to heaven. Then, he has to come down to earth again, or
maybe he has to go to hell. Sometimes he is born as a deva, sometimes as a
demon, sometimes as the master, and at other times as the servant.’

ei-rüpe saàsära bhramite kona jana
sädhu-saìge nija-tattva avagata hana

“‘While transmigrating from birth to birth in this material universe, if by
chance the living entity comes into contact with a saintly person, he
immediately becomes aware of his true identity as a pure spiritual soul, the
eternal servant of Kåñëa.’

nija-tattva jäni ära saàsära na cäya
kena vä bhajinu mäyä kare häya häya

“‘Enlightened by this knowledge, he desires material entanglement no longer,
lamenting, “Alas! Why have I served this illusory material energy for so long?’

kende bole, ohe kåñëa! ämi tava däsa
tomära caraëa chäòi’ haila sarva-näça

“‘He bitterly cries out, “Kåñëa, my Lord, I am your eternal servant. Ever since
I left the shelter of Your lotus feet, my life has been completely devastated.”

kåpä kari kåñëa täre chäòäna saàsära
käkuti kariyä kåñëe òäke eka-bära

“‘Çré Kåñëa is so merciful that if anyone entreats Him earnestly, He immediately
releases him from material entanglement.’

mäyäke pichane räkhi’ kåñëa-päne cäya
bhajite bhajite kåñëa-päda-padma päya

“‘When the jéva breaks away from mäyä’s captivating spell and strives for
attainment of Çré Kåñëa by rendering devotional service, he regains the supreme
shelter of the Lord’s lotus feet.’ 

kåñëa täre dena nija-cic-chaktira bala
mäyä äkarñaëa chäòe haiyä durbala

“‘Çré Kåñëa fortifies him with His transcendental, internal potency, and this
overbearing power of the Lord’s spiritual potency weakens mäyä’s influence upon
the living entity.’

sädhu-saìge kåñëa-näma’—ei-mätra cäi
saàsära jinite ära kona vastu näi

“‘The only desirable goal is to chant harinäma in the association of pure and
saintly devotees. This is the best and only way to conquer nescience.’ 

“These are verses one to thirteen of the sixth chapter of the Çré Prema-vivarta
of Jagadänanda Paëòita.”

Yädava däsa, “Revered master, you have just mentioned sädhu-saìga. Nevertheless,
sädhus are also present in and harassed by this saàsära. How can they offer
salvation to others?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “Indeed, the sädhus live in saàsära, but the saàsära
condition of the sädhus and the saàsära condition of the jévas who are
captivated by mäyä differ widely from each other. Seen from the outside, both
saàsära conditions appear to be the same, but ontologically they are poles
apart. Moreover, the sädhus have been living in this world since time
immemorial, but unfortunately gross materialistic men cannot recognize them and
so saintly association has become uncommon.

“Jévas under the sway of mäyä may be categorized into two groups. One group is
engrossed in the insignificant pleasures of sensuality and is immensely
infatuated with saàsära, while the other group, after realising that mäyä on the
gross material level is ill-equipped to offer satisfaction, employs intelligent
discrimination in the hope of attaining a higher quality of happiness. Thus,
there are two groups of jévas living in saàsära: viveka-çünya, without
discrimination; and viveka-yukta, endowed with discrimination.

“Scholars commonly refer to them as viñayé, gross materialists, and mumukñu,
seekers of liberation. The term mumukñu should not be misinterpreted to mean a
person striving for knowledge of the nirbheda-brahman, undifferentiated Brahman.
The Vedas have given the actual definition of the mumukñu as someone who
searches for the soothing escape of self-realization, after being incinerated in
the fire of material existence. Thus, the Sanskrit word mumukñu means desire for
liberation. When the mumukñus cast aside the desire for mukti and engage in
unmotivated service to the Lord, they enter into the realm of pure bhakti.
Actually, the scriptures do not urge anyone to adopt mukti as his ultimate goal.
Nevertheless, as soon as the mumukñu person is enlightened with the tattva of
Kåñëa and jéva, he is automatically liberated. For example, the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 6.14.3-5, states:

rajobhiù sama-saìkhyätäù
pärthivair iha jantavaù
teñäà ye kecanehante 
çreyo vai manujädayaù

“‘In this material world there are as many living entities as there are atoms.
Among these living entities very few are human beings, and among them, few are
interested in following religious principles.’

präyo mumukñavas teñäà 
kecanaiva dvijottama
mumukñüëäà sahasreñu 
kaçcin mucyeta sidhyati

“‘O best of the brähmaëas, Sukadeva Gosvämé, out of many persons who follow
religious principles, only a few desire liberation from this material world.
Among many thousands who desire liberation, only one may actually achieve
liberation, giving up his material attachment to society, friendship, love,
country, home, wife and children. And among many thousands of such liberated
persons, one who can understand the true meaning of liberation is very rare.’ 

muktänäm api siddhänäà 
näräyaëa-paräyaëaù
su-durlabhaù praçäntätmä 
koöiñv api mahä-mune

“‘O great sage, among many millions who are liberated and perfect in knowledge
of liberation, only one may become a devotee of Çré Näräyaëa, (Kåñëa). Such
devotees, who are fully peaceful, are extremely rare.’ 

“If a devotee of Çré Näräyaëa is extremely rare, then a devotee of Kåñëa is even
more exceptional. Those who have attained the liberated state become Kåñëa’s
devotees after nullifying the noisome mumukñu, the desire for liberation.

“The devotee must remain in saàsära as long as his bodily tabernacle exists, but
his saàsära condition is diametrically opposed to that of the viñayé, gross
materialists. The devotees of Kåñëa have two situations within this world:
gåhasta, householder; and tyägé, renunciate.”

Yädava däsa, “From your explanation and the çlokas from the Çrémad Bhägavatam
that you have just quoted I conclude that there are four different states for
the viveka-yukta persons. Amongst these four, whose association may be called
sädhu-saìga?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “Viveké, intelligent, enlightened; mumukñu, desirous of
liberation; mukta-siddha, liberated; and bhakta, devotee, are the four different
states of viveka-yukta. For the viñayé association with the viveké, who is
endowed with discrimination between matter and spirit, and the mumukñu, the
desirer of liberation, is beneficial. The mukta-siddha jévas may be subdivided
into two groups: one who is eager for rasa, spiritual mellow; and one who is
attached to mäyävädé monistic liberation. Association with the first type of
mukta-siddha jéva is certainly the more advantageous. The mukta-siddha mäyävädé,
on the other hand, is an offender; his association is not recommended for
anyone. 

Upon mukta-siddha mäyävädé, the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 10.2.32, gives this verdict: 

ye ‘nye ‘ravindäkña vimukta-mäninas
tvayyasta-bhäväd aviçuddha-buddhayaù
äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù
patanty adho ‘nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù 

“‘O lotus-eyed one, those who think they are liberated in this life, but are
without devotional service to You, are of impure intelligence. Although they
accept austere severities and penances and rise to the spiritual position, to
impersonal Brahman realization, they fall down again because they neglect to
worship Your lotus feet.’

“The fourth kind of viveka-yukta is the bhaktas, the Lord’s devotees, who may be
divided into two groups. Firstly, those inclined to aiçvarya, Kåñëa’s opulence,
their mood is laced with awe and reverence toward the Lord. And secondly, those
who are inclined to mädhurya, a spontaneous loving relationship with Kåñëa. For
everyone in all respects, association with bhaktas is certainly the most
edifying—and especially the association of the mädhurya-para, the bhakta
inclined to mädhurya. If one takes shelter of such a bhakta, transcendental rasa
will appear within one’s heart.”

Yädava däsa, “Earlier you said that Kåñëa’s bhaktas are found in two situations
within this world. Can you speak about the bhaktas in detail, so that a dull
person like me can properly understand?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “Bhaktas are found in two situations: the gåhastha-bhaktas,
the householder devotees; and the gåha-tyägé-bhaktas, the devotees who have
renounced householder life.”

Yädava däsa, “Kindly describe in a detailed manner the relationship of the
gåhastha-bhakta to saàsära?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “A person who just builds a house and lives in it is not
necessarily a gåhastha. To be a gåhastha one must accept a suitable wife by
marriage, and establish a household—both items according to the Vedic rules and
regulations. A person practicing bhakti situated in such a manner is a
gåhastha-bhakta. 

“The conditioned soul exploits this material nature through the five doors of
the knowledge-gathering senses. With his eyes, he sees form and colour, and with
his ears, he hears sounds. He smells with his nose, tastes with his tongue, and
feels and touches with his skin. With these five senses, he probes this world
and develops attachment to it. The more he is attracted to matter, the further
he moves away from the sweet Lord of the Heart, Çré Kåñëa. This is known as the
enchanting external phantasmagoria of saàsära. Those who are thusly submerged in
saàsära are called viñayé.

“However, when the Lord’s devotee is situated in household life, he does not
abandon himself to sensual cravings like the viñayé. He takes his dharma-patné,
wife as a partner in realizing nitya-dharma, as a maidservant of Kåñëa and his
sons and daughters are also seen as the servitors of Kåñëa. His eyes seek
fulfilment in seeing the Lord’s Deity form and other paraphernalia connected to
Kåñëa. His ears yearn to be satisfied by hearing Kåñëa conscious topics about
the Lord and His devotees. He exults in smelling the fragrance of tulasé leaves
and buds, scents, and flowers offered to Kåñëa. His tongue relishes uttering
harinäma and tasting the delicious food offered to Kåñëa. He experiences divine
ecstasy by touching the feet of the Vaiñëavas. His ambitions and hopes,
activities, desires, hospitality, and worship of the devas are all carried out
as a part of his main pursuit, rendering devotional service to Kåñëa. His entire
life is a joyous festival, consisting of compassion towards all living entities,
chanting harinäma, and serving the Vaiñëavas. To enjoy material pleasures
without attachment is only possible in the household life of the Lord’s
devotees. For the jévas in Kali-yuga, it is most suitable to become
gåhastha-bhaktas for then there is no fear of falling down and full spiritual
advancement is definitely achievable. 

“Many highly intelligent and self-realized gurus have been amongst the
gåhastha-vaiñëavas. If their hereditary descendants also become pure Vaiñëavas,
then they are also gåhastha-bhaktas whose association is most beneficial to
humanity.”

Yädava däsa, “Gåhastha-vaiñëavas have to remain under the regulations of the
smartas, the karma-käëòé brähmaëas, otherwise they face problems in society. How
can they cultivate çuddha-bhakti under these circumstances?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “Gåhastha-vaiñëavas have to conform to certain social
conventions such as viväha, Vedic marriage of sons and daughters; çräddha,
offering oblations to departed parents; and so on. However, they are not
required to perform kämya-karma, fruitive activities for the purpose of
materialistic ambitions. 

“As one can understand, one has to admit dependence upon external things in
order to maintain and care for the material body. Even those who claim to be
nirapekña, detached, have to accept this dependence. When a person is sick or
suffers great pain, he must take medicine. Furthermore, he must procure food and
eat when hungry, arrange for clothing against the chill, build a roof against
the sun and rain, and so on. Such necessities are normal for the embodied soul,
and he is dependent upon them. The real meaning of being detached is to
factually reduce this dependence. However, as long as the material body is
present, it is impossible to be totally independent of material needs. Still, at
the same time, the reduction of material necessities is certainly conducive to
devotional surrender and progress. 

“If a person is able to dovetail all the above-mentioned activities with Kåñëa’s
service, then the imperfections are rectified. For example, a person should not
marry with the express intention of expanding his dynasty, ostentatiously
worshipping Prajapati, the deva of progeny. Rather, he should think that he is
accepting Kåñëa’s maidservant as his life-partner to establish a Kåñëa conscious
family. Such resolutions are favourable to bhakti. Materialistic relatives,
priests, and others may offer their advice, but ultimately a person accrues the
result of his own vows and resolution.

“A gåhastha-bhakta will observe çräddha by giving kåñëa-prasädam to the departed
soul as piëòa, oblations, and feed and offer charity to vaiñëava-brähmaëas—this
is spiritually beneficial to him. When the devotional practices of bhakti are
integrated with the smarta rituals, then the negative fruitive results are
removed. On account of including the Vaiñëava activities of çuddha-bhakti, there
will be no hindrance on the path of bhakti. Social dealings should be conducted
dispassionately and with detachment, while spiritual activities must be executed
in sädhu-saìga. Then all these performances are pruned of their imperfections.
Just observe that the majority of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu’s pärñada, eternal
associates, are gåhastha-bhaktas. Since the dawn of history, many devotees who
were räjarñi, saintly kings; devas, demigods; and åñés, philosophers, were
gåhastha-bhaktas. You must understand that gåhastha-bhaktas are universally
worshipable.”

Yädava däsa, “If the gåhastha-bhaktas are so highly estimated and are heir to
the treasure of the most sublime aspects of kåñëa-prema, then why do some of
them enter the renounced order of life and thus become gåha-tyägé, renouncers of
home?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “A very few of the gåhastha-bhaktas become suitable
candidates for the renounced life of a gåha-tyägé and their association is
extremely rare.”

Yädava däsa, “What qualifications are required to become a gåha-tyägé?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “Human beings have two propensities: bahirmukha, the
external material tendency; and antarmukha, the internal spiritual tendency. In
Vedic terms, these are known as paräk, turned away from the Supreme; and
pratyak, turned towards the Lord with higher spiritual aspiration. 

“The pure spiritual soul has forgotten his original identity and presumptuously
assumed the gross material body and subtle mind to be his self. In this way,
having mistakenly identified his self with the mundane mind and body, the
conditioned soul views the material nature through the instruments of his senses
and experiences attraction and attachment to the external objects of the
phenomenal world. This is called bahirmukha-pravåtti, the external material
propensity. When this process is reversed and the consciousness flows inwards
away from matter and the senses to the mind and then onwards to the soul, then
the consciousness is termed as having the antarmukha-pravåtti, internal
spiritual propensity. 

“As long as the external propensity is predominant, one must, without offence
and on the strength of saintly association, unfailingly dovetail all one’s
propensities in Kåñëa consciousness. In the secure shelter of the bhakti
process, the bahirmukha-pravåtti will swiftly shrink back and change direction
towards the antarmukha-pravåtti. When the propensity turns totally inwards,
antarmukha, the gåhastha-bhakta earns the eligibility to be a gåha-tyägé. If a
gåhastha renounces the household situation prematurely, there is every
possibility of failure. The household situation is a school for the jéva wherein
he educates himself with ätmä-tattva, the knowledge of the spiritual self. Once
his education is over, he may leave school.”

Yädava däsa, “What symptoms indicate that a devotee has acquired the eligibility
to become a gåha-tyägé?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “He must be completely free from the desire to associate
with women. He should be very merciful to all living creatures, handle money and
material possessions with indifference, accumulate just enough food and clothing
for times of want, have pure love of Kåñëa, avoid the company of gross
materialists, be unconcerned about either praise or insult, be uninterested in
ostentatious show, and be equipoised and dispassionate in life or death. These
symptoms are described in the following verses of the Çrémad Bhägavatam,
11.2.45: 

çré-havir uväca
sarva-bhüteñu yaù paçyed
bhagavad-bhävam ätmanaù
bhütäni bhagavaty ätmany
eña bhägavatottamaù

“‘A person advanced in devotional service sees within everything the Soul of all
souls, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. Consequently he always
sees the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the cause of all causes
and understands that all things are situated within Him.’

“Further, the Çrémad Bhägavatam, 3.25.22:

mayy ananyena bhävena
bhaktià kurvanti ye dåòhäm
mat-kåte tyakta-karmäëas
tyakta-svajana-bändhaväù

“‘Such a sädhu engages in staunch devotional service to the Lord without
deviation. For the sake of the Lord he renounces all other connections, such as
family relationships and friendly acquaintances within the world.’

“Further, the Çrémad Bhägavatam, 11.2.55:

visåjati hådayaà na yasya säkñäd
dharir avaçäbhihito ’py aghaugha-näçaù
praëaya-rasanayä dhåtäìghri-padmaù
sa bhavati bhägavata-pradhäna uktaù

“‘Çré Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead who destroys everything
inauspicious for His devotees, does not leave the hearts of His devotees even if
they remember and chant about Him inattentively. This is because the rope of
love always binds the Lord to stay within the devotees’ hearts. Such devotees
should be accepted as most elevated.’

“When these symptoms manifest in a gåhastha-bhakta, he becomes incapable of
performing karma. Naturally, he leaves the household and becomes a gåha-tyägé.
However such elevated and detached saints are extremely exceptional. If anyone
in his lifetime can find the association of such a holy person, he is truly
fortunate.”

Yädava däsa, “Nowadays, I notice a tendency for some young persons to leave
their home, receive spiritual initiation, construct a small temple, and start
Deity worship. Nevertheless, after some time they fall into the bad company of
women. Of course, they continue to chant japa and somehow maintain their
situation by begging. Would you categorize them as tyägés or gåhastha-bhaktas?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “You have raised many points at once. I will answer them one
by one. The criterion is not age, old or young. A gåhastha-bhakta may deserve to
become a gåha-tyägé at an early age because of a combination of spiritual
purification in his previous births and further spiritual enhancement in the
present one. For example, Çukadeva Gosvämé was eligible from the moment of his
birth to renounce hearth and home. Utmost attention must be given to determine
that worthiness is not postured, or acquired through artificial austerities.
When genuine renunciation manifests, youth is not detrimental.”

Yädava däsa, “What are the differences between genuine detachment and artificial
renunciation?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “Genuine detachment is without vacillation, a resolve that
is never broken. False renunciation is a consequence of material cunning, a
cheating mentality, and the desire for a position of respect. Some persons take
to false renunciation with the intention of winning the respect that is
naturally given to genuinely detached devotees. All this is useless and
extremely harmful. As soon as such a person leaves home and family, the symptoms
of detachment also wane and instead he becomes haunted with moral aberrations.”

Yädava däsa, “Is it essential for a gåha-tyägé bhakta to change his dress,
adopting the garb of a renunciant?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “Actually, when all attachments to household life are
completely annihilated, the nirapekña-akiïcana-bhakta, detached devotee, can
stay anywhere, in the forest or in the house. Such an elevated saint purifies
the whole world. Sometimes, however, they are seen as bhiksus, saints who live
by begging, and so they go around dressed in kaupéna, loincloth, and carrying a
kanthä, a coverlet sown from used and worn-out clothing. When they take the vows
of ‘kaupéna and kanthä,’ they do so in the presence of other gåha-tyägé bhaktas,
in order to fortify their resolve. This is known as veña, the method of
receiving the garb of a mendicant, which admits them to the life of bhikñä,
begging. How can there be any objection to accepting veña in this way?”

Yädava däsa, “Is there a purpose to being recognized as a bhikñu on the basis of
one’s kaupéna and kanthä?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “Once a devotee by wearing kaupéna and kanthä is seen by the
world as a bhikñu, then his relatives and family members will disown him very
easily and thus he, in turn, will reject any thought of going back home. A
natural attraction for detachment as well as repulsion for the company of
materialistic people will consume him. The experienced gåha-tyägé devotee with a
seasoned sense of detachment may not require a change of dress. However for some
receiving veña does help. Elevated devotees who display the following
characteristics do not need to accept veña, as stated in the Çrémad Bhägavatam,
4.29.46:

yadä yasyänugåhëäti
bhagavän ätma-bhävitaù
sa jahäti matià loke
vede ca pariniñöhitäm

“‘When a person is fully engaged in devotional service, he is favoured by the
Lord, who bestows His causeless mercy. At such a time, the awakened devotee
gives up all material activities and ritualistic performances mentioned in the
Vedas. His only concern is the real need of humanity.’

“There is no injunction for these awakened devotees to outwardly accept the garb
of detachment. However as a matter of public consideration such acceptance may
sometimes be taken as necessary.” 

Yädava däsa, “Who can give veña?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “One should receive veña from a gåha-tyägé bhakta. A
gåhastha-bhakta has not experienced the life of a renunciant; hence, he must not
give veña to anybody. The Brahma-vaivarta Puräëa states: 

aparékñyopadiñöaà yat loka-näçäya tad bhavet 

“‘Without first practising spiritual life, one should not advise others, as this
will create chaos in society.’

Yädava däsa, “What are the points a guru must consider when he initiates a
devotee with veña?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “The first point a guru must consider is whether the
disciple is competent. Has he, as a gåhastha-bhakta, been able to attain the
brahminical qualities such as equanimity, sense control, and so on by practising
devotional service to Kåñëa? Has he shaken off the desire to associate with
women? Has he uprooted the material cravings for wealth, opulent food and
clothing, and luxurious living? The guru will have the disciple stay with him
for some time to test him properly. Only when he is convinced of his disciple’s
eligibility, and not before, will he initiate him into veña. The guru will
surely fall down if he initiates an undeserving disciple.”

Yädava däsa, “Now I understand that receiving bheka or veña is not an easy
affair, but is actually an extremely serious observance. Indeed, the unqualified
so-called gurus have made this bheka or veña a mere meaningless ritual, a farce.
Unfortunately this is only the beginning, I wonder where all this will end?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “It was in order to protect the sanctity of this process
that Çré Caitanya chastised Choöa Haridäsa for a minor deviation. Those who
claim to be followers of my Lord, Çré Mahaprabhu, must always remember this
punishment of Choöa Haridäsa.”

Yädava däsa, “Is it an authorized process to receive bheka, construct a temple,
and begin Deity worship?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “No, after receiving veña, a competent devotee enters into
mendicant life, which means every day he must go out and maintain himself by
begging. He will not entangle himself in temple construction and other
large-scale enterprises. He will live in a solitary hut, or in the temple of a
gåhastha. He must not utilize money for his needs or anything else. He will
simply use all his time and energy to chant harinäma without offence.”

Yädava däsa, “Then what may one call those who after leaving home build their
own temple and live in it as if it were a household?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “They are called väntäçé, those who eat their own vomit.
They are eating what they have regurgitated.”

Yädava däsa, “Is such a person no longer a Vaiñëava?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “When his actions are contrary to scriptural injunctions and
opposed to the principles of vaiñëava-dharma, why should we seek his
association? He has deviated from the path of çuddha-bhakti and adopted deceit
and caprice. What Vaiñëava qualities are still left in him?”

Yädava däsa, “How can we say that he has forsaken vaiñëava-dharma, if he
continues to chant harinäma?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “Chanting harinäma and nämäparädha, offences against
harinäma, are two different subjects. Wherever you see sinful activities being
committed on the strength of chanting, that is nämäparädha. You must run far
away from nämäparädha.”

Yädava däsa, “Can we call his condition of saàsära, Kåñëa conscious or not?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “Certainly not! A Kåñëa conscious life is not tainted by
deceit; it is filled with simplicity and honesty and offences are absent.”

Yädava däsa, “Then, he must be inferior to a gåhastha-bhakta?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “If he is not even a bhakta, then there cannot be a
comparison with any kind of bhakta.”

Yädava däsa, “How can he be saved?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “He must first give up his offensive activities. Then he
must chant incessantly, until tears of remorse bring him back to the Vaiñëava
fold.”

Yädava däsa, “Respected Bäbäjé, the gåhastha-bhaktas follow the varëäçrama
system, therefore is it possible for a gåhastha to become a Vaiñëava if he is
excluded from the varëäçrama system?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “If only you knew how liberal and magnanimous the
vaiñëava-dharma is! It is also known as jaiva-dharma, the religion for all
living entities. Every human being from any position has the right to follow the
vaiñëava-dharma. Those born in the lowest status of humanity, known as antyajas
can embrace vaiñëava-dharma and live as gåhastha-bhaktas although they are
outside the varëäçrama society. Another example is a sannyäsé, the highest
religious order in the varëäçrama system, who breaks his sannyäsa vows and falls
down. Nevertheless, later, by association with saintly persons he may be
reinstated in çuddha-bhakti and live as a gåhastha-bhakta although he is now an
outcaste from the varëäçrama society. Those persons and their descendants who
are excluded from the varëäçrama society because of unlawful actions may take up
the process of çuddha-bhakti by associating with sädhus—they can become
gåhastha-bhaktas, although they have no status in the varëäçrama society.
Therefore, there are two types of gåhastha-bhaktas: varëäçrama-dharma-yukta,
those within the varëäçrama system; and varëäçrama-dharma-rahita, those outside
the varëäçrama system.”

Yädava däsa, “Which of the two is better?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “He who has developed the higher intensity bhakti is
naturally the better. As for those who are in either of these two conditions but
are actually bereft of bhakti, the vyävahärika point of view of materialistic
society will adjudge those who are within the varëäçrama society as being the
better of the two. At least they have a locus standi in varëäçrama society,
while the others are antyajas. However, seen from the paramärthika point of view
both are the same—they are both degraded because they are without bhakti.”

Yädava däsa, “Can a gåhastha wear the dress of a gåha-tyägé while still a
householder?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “No. If he were to do so, he would be indicted on two
offences, deceiving himself and deceiving the world. If a gåhastha wears a
kaupéna and carries a kanthä, etc., he ridicules and insults the gåha-tyägé
bhakta who is formally initiated into bhikñä.”

Yädava däsa, “Respected Bäbäjé, is there an authorized scriptural procedure for
receiving bheka or veña?”

Ananta däsa Bäbäjé, “It has not been clearly outlined. A human being from any
varëa can embrace the vaiñëava-dharma. However, according to the scripture, only
a brähmaëa can accept the sannyäsa order, no other. In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
7.11.35, Närada Muni first describes the characteristics of the different varëas
and then goes on to say:

yasya yal lakñaëaà proktaà 
puàso varëäbhivyaïjakam
yad anyaträpi dåçyeta 
tat tenaiva vinirdiçet

“‘If one shows the symptoms of being a brähmaëa, kñatriya, vaiçya, or çüdra, as
described above, even if he has appeared in a different caste, he should be
accepted according to those symptoms of classification.’

“On the strength of this scriptural statement the practice of giving sannyäsa to
persons having brahminical qualities, although born in lower varëas was started.
If all these conditions are met with, such a practice is certainly to be
accepted as authorized by the scriptures. Of course, this is only applicable in
spiritual paramärthika consideration and is not applicable according to mundane
vyävahärika convention.”

At this point, Yädava däsa turned to his companion, “Dear Caëòédäsa, has your
question been answered?”

Caëòédäsa replied, “I was able to assimilate the following from the wonderful
spiritual teachings by the most respectable Ananta däsa Bäbäjé: Jéva, having
forgotten that he is an eternal servant of Çré Kåñëa, accepts the material body
and under the influence of the guëas, three material modes, he begins to try to
exploit this world. In return for this, he is rewarded with pain and enjoyment.
In his attempt to enjoy the results of his actions, he is forced to accept
birth, disease, old age, and finally death. He goes through many lives,
sometimes with a high birth, sometimes with a low birth, but each time his soul
is covered by a new false ego. He is driven to protect his fragile mortal body
from the ravages of hunger and thirst. He has to suffer in many ways because of
an imbalanced distribution and unavailability of essential commodities. His body
is under constant siege from the various and inevitable distresses. Insufferable
quarrels and disputes with wife and children sometimes drive him to commit
suicide.

“He is forced by greed for money to commit many sinful activities, ending up by
being punished by the law, becoming a pariah of society, and thus bringing upon
himself untold misery. There is no relief from anxiety and lamentation brought
about by death in the family, loss of wealth, attacks by rogues, etc. Even in
old age, sorrows accompany him when his family members neglect his needs.
Rheumatic and phlegmatic conditions trouble him as the body begins to age and
gradually disintegrate. After death, the sojourn in the next mother’s womb is at
every moment a harrowing and excruciating experience. Combined with all this
suffering, lust, anger, greed, illusion, madness, and envy smother the
conscience and sense of discrimination into obscurity. This is saàsära, material
existence.

“Now, I have properly grasped the purport of the word saàsära. I repeatedly fall
at the feet of all the assembled bäbäjés. The Vaiñëavas are the real gurus of
this world and today by their mercy I have gained the actual understanding of
saàsära.”

The entire assembly of Vaiñëavas burst out loudly, uttering harinäma and
praising Ananta däsa Bäbäjé for his perceptive spiritual analysis. More
Vaiñëavas joined their group and Lähiré Mahäçaya began to sing a composition of
his own:

e ghora saàsäre, paòiyä mänava, na päya duùkhera çeña
sädhu-saìga kori’, hari bhaje yadi, tabe anta haya kleça

“There is no end to the jéva’s suffering after falling into the dark well of
saàsära. However, if he associates with saintly souls and turns in surrender to
the Supreme Lord Çré Hari, then he puts a stop to his distress. 

viñaya-anale, jvaliche hådaya, anale bäòe anala
aparädha chaòi’ laya kåñëa-näma, anale paòaye jäla

“This material life means being consumed by a fire, where all material
endeavours are fuel for the fire. When the incinerated jéva takes up chanting
the transcendental name of Kåñëa without offence, this merciful rain puts out
the flames. 

nitai-caitanya-caraëa-kamale, äçraya laila yei
kälidäsa bole, jévane maraàe, ämära äçrayä sei

“I, Kälidäsa, consider those who have taken shelter at the lotus feet of Çré Çré
Nityänanda Caitanya as my only safe sanctuary in this life.”

Caëòédäsa was extremely moved by the words of the song and began to dance along.
At the end he fell like a stick at the feet of the bäbäjés. He sanctified
himself by applying the dust from their feet upon his head, beginning to roll
upon the ground, and crying in ineffable joy. The assembled Vaiñëavas who
witnessed Caëòédäsa’s ecstatic emotion agreed that he was very fortunate.

After a while Yädava däsa said softly to Caëòédäsa, “Come, let us return, we
must cross over the Gaìgä.” 

Caëòédäsa replied humorously, “If you will take me across the material ocean, I
will certainly accompany you.”

Together they offered their dandavats in Pradyumna-kuïja and came out of the
entranceway where they saw Damayanté offering repeated obeisances to all the
Vaiñëavas. She said, “Alas! Why was I born as a woman! If I were a man, I could
unhesitatingly go inside the kuïja, behold the lotus feet of the Vaiñëava sädhus
and offer my dandavats, thus fulfilling the purpose of this human life. My wish
is that birth after birth I may serve the Vaiñëavas in Navadvépa.”

Yädava däsa said, “O mother! This Godruma-dhäma is extremely sacred. As soon as
one enters, one is rewarded with pure bhakti. In Godruma played our beloved Çré
Çacénandana Nimäi. This was the village of the cowherd men, gopa-palli. Knowing
the glories of this place, Çréla Prabodänanda Sarasvaté Gosvämé has prayed in
his Çré Navadvépa-çataka, verse 36:

na loka-vedoddhåta-märga-bhedair
äviçya saìkliçyata re vimudhäù
hatheëa sarvaà parihåtya gauòe
çré-godrume parëa-kuöéà kurudhvam

“‘O foolish jéva! By taking shelter of society and the Vedas, you have tried out
so many religious paths, but they have only brought you distress. Now renounce
these uncertain methods and immediately go to Godruma, build yourself a thatched
hut, and live there.’”

The three of them returned to Kuliyä-gräma after crossing the Gaìgä. A wonderful
transformation took place in Caëòédäsa and his wife Damayanté devé from that day
on. They began exhibiting the Vaiñëava mood and qualities and it appeared that
material life could no longer touch them. All their time was taken up in serving
the Vaiñëavas, chanting harinäma, and doing acts of mercy to all living beings.
How wonderful was this newly changed Vaiñëava couple! What immense potency there
is in the mercy of a Vaiñëava! All glories to kåñëa-näma! All glories to the
sacred land of Çré Navadvépa-dhäma!

Thus ends the seventh chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma and
Saàsära, Material Existence

JDH 8: Nitya-dharma and Vaiñëava Behaviour

Chapter Eight
Nitya-dharma and Vaiñëava Behaviour

One day, responding to an invitation, the Vaiñëavas of Godruma arrived to visit
the Vaiñëavas living in the woods skirting the southeastern embankment of the
sacred Çré Gorä-hrada Lake. They were all sitting together in a secluded kuïja
having just taken noon prasädam when Lähiré Mahäçaya sang the following song,
evoking vraja-bhäva, the spiritual emotions of Vraja, in the hearts of the
assembled Vaiñëavas: 

gaura! kata élä karile ekhäne
advaitädi bhakta-saìge näcile e vane raëge

“Our Çré Gauräìga has performed so many transcendental pastimes here with
Advaita Äcärya and His other associates. He danced splendidly in these green
groves. 

käliya-damana-saìkértane 
e hrada haite prabhu, nistärile nakra prabhu
kåñëa yena käliya-damane

“Once, whilst performing saìkértana, Çré Gauräìga liberated a crocodile living
in these waters. Thus the Lord delivered the crocodile just as Çré Gopäla Kåñëa
delivered the Käliya snake many years before in Vraja.”

A few minutes later, a discussion began about the unity of gaura-lélä with
kåñëa-lélä. Soon some more Vaiñëavas from Baòagächi arrived, first offering
daëòavats to the Gorä-hrada Lake and then to the Vaiñëavas, who received them
heartily and offered them comfortable seats. 

Like a silent sentinel in the secluded kuïja, an ancient banyan tree stood tall.
Around the base, the Vaiñëavas had built a concrete circular platform. The tree
was affectionately named Nityänanda-vaöa because Çré Nityänanda had been very
fond of sitting below its fine branches. Now the Vaiñëavas themselves were
sitting under those same branches blissfully discussing spiritual topics. At one
point, an inquisitive young Vaiñëava amongst the visitors spoke up respectfully,
“I would like to have permission to ask this Vaiñëava assembly a question.
Kindly pacify my enquiring mind.” 

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, a resident of this secluded kuïja, was at the advanced age
of nearly a hundred years a very serious scholar and among the few persons still
remaining who had actually seen Çré Nityänanda sitting in the shade of the
banyan tree. Over the years, he had single-mindedly nourished the desire to
breathe his last at this site. He seldom left the kuïja and then only to
Pradyumna Kuïja to meet Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé. Now he spoke up, saying,
“Sir, we have Çré Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé here heading up this assembly, so
you should not have any concern regarding an answer to your question.”

The young Vaiñëava from Baòagächi then enquired with humility, “Vaiñëava-dharma
is nitya-dharma, I would like to learn in detail about the ideal conduct of a
Vaiñëava, especially towards other people.”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé glanced and motioned in Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé’s direction,
“My dear Vaiñëava däsa, a good Vaiñëava and scholar such as you is rarely found
in Bengal, especially nowadays. Hence, it is appropriate that you should reply
to this question. Having associated with Çréla Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté and
having received spiritual instructions from Çréla Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé,
you are most fortunate and a recipient of Çré Caitanya’s mercy.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé replied humbly, “Revered Bäbäjé, you have seen Çré
Nityänanda, Çré Balaräma’s direct expansion, face to face. You have also
associated with many spiritual stalwarts and instructed many devotees in the
devotional sciences; therefore, please shower your mercy upon us today and
educate us.”

The Vaiñëavas unanimously and enthusiastically requested Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé to
speak and finding no way out he agreed. After first offering daëòavats to Çré
Nityänanda under the banyan tree, he began his dissertation, “First, I offer my
respect to all jévas, knowing them to be the servitors of Çré Kåñëa. In the
Caitanya-caritämåta, Ädi-lélä 6.85, Çréla Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja has written:

keha mäne, keha nä mäne, saba täìra däsa
ye nä mäne, tära haya sei päpe näça

“‘Some accept Him whereas others do not, yet everyone is His servant. One who
does not accept Him, however, will be ruined by sinful activities.’ 

“I always greatly appreciate this statement of the great saint Çréla Kåñëadäsa
Kaviräja and bear it upon my head. Although inherently all jévas are the
servants of Kåñëa, one class of jévas does not accept their position of
subservience to Éçvara, the Supreme Lord, whereas another class humbly accepts
this eternal truth. Thus, there are two kinds of men in this world:
kåñëa-bahirmukha, those who deny Kåñëa as the Supreme; and kåñëa-unmukha, those
who accept Kåñëa as the Supreme. The majority of people in the world are
kåñëa-bahirmukha, amongst whom many reject any form of religion at all. There is
little to say about them except that they have no sense of moral obligation and
their only aim in life is to increase their material power, rank and wealth.
However, there are those who are religious and accept a sense of moral
responsibility for their behaviour. For their guidance, the great Vaiñëava sage
Manu has stated in the Manu-saàhitä 6.92:

dhåtiù kñamä damo ‘steyaà çaucam indriya-nigrahaù
dhér vidyä-satyam akrodho daçakaà dharma-lakñaëam

“‘The ten characteristics of religiosity are dhåtiù, contentment; kñamä,
forgiveness, that is not revenging a wrong; dama, self-control, that is
remaining in control of the mind in spite of the presence of allurements;
asteya, honesty; çaucam, cleanliness; indriya-nigraha, withdrawing the senses
from sense-objects; dhéh, scriptural knowledge; vidyä, education, that is
knowledge of the soul; satyam, truthfulness, that is awareness of reality; and
akrodha, freedom from anger, that is to be not angered when provoked.’

“Of these, dhåtiù, contentment; dama, self-control; çauca, cleanliness;
indriya-nigraha, withdrawing the senses; dhéh, scriptural knowledge; and vidyä,
knowledge of the soul are the six duties and characteristics directed towards
oneself. Whereas, kñamä, forgiveness; asteya, honesty; satyam, truthfulness; and
akrodha, freedom from anger, are the four obligations towards others. However,
the duty of worshiping the Supreme Lord, Çré Hari, is not clearly delineated in
any of these ten characteristics, which have been enumerated to encourage us in
following the moral religious principles. Furthermore, it cannot be said that
human life becomes pure and perfect by only developing these characteristics. In
the Viñëu-dharmottara, which is quoted in the Hari-bhakti-viläsa, 10.317, it is
explained:

jévitaà viñëu-bhaktasya varaà païca-dinäni ca
na tu kalpa-sahasräëi bhakti-hénasya keçave

“‘If a devotee of Çré Viñëu stays in this world for even five days, it is a
great blessing to humanity. However, if a non-devotee—one who has no devotion
for the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa—lives in the world for hundreds of aeons, it
will not benefit humanity; in fact it will usher in misfortunes.’

“A person who is not a devotee of Kåñëa cannot be labelled a human being.
Without devotion, men are mere biped animals, not humans. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
2.3.19, states the same:

çva-viò-varähoñöra-kharaiù
saàstutaù puruñaù paçuù
na yat-karëa-pathopeto
jätu näma gadägrajaù

“‘Men who are like dogs, hogs, camels and asses praise those men who never
listen to the transcendental pastimes of Çré Kåñëa, the deliverer from evils.’

“However, the present inquiry is not about the duties and responsibilities of
those unfortunate persons mentioned above. The discussion is regarding the
conduct of a devotee towards the people in general. Those who have embraced this
path of bhakti are divided into three groups: kaniñöha, neophyte; madhyama,
intermediate; and uttama, topmost. The first of these types is described in the
Çrémad Bhägavatam 11.2.47 in the following verse:

arcäyäm eva haraye
püjäà yaù çraddhayehate
na tad-bhakteñu cänyeñu
sa bhaktaù präkåtaù småtaù

“‘A präkåta, materialistic devotee, does not purposefully study the çästra and
try to understand the actual standard of pure devotional service. Consequently,
he does not show proper respect to advanced devotees. He may, however, follow
the regulative principles he has learnt from his spiritual master or family
tradition and worship the Deity in the temple. He is to be considered as being
on the material platform, although he is trying to advance in devotional
service.’

“Such a person is a bhakta-präya, or bhakta-äbhäsa, a neophyte devotee, for he
is but a little enlightened about the Vaiñëava philosophy. One who worships the
Deity of the Lord with faith, but neither respects the created living creatures
of the Lord, nor worships and serves His devotees with devotion is a
präkåta-bhakta. Already, it has been established that çraddhä, faith, is the
seed of devotion. To worship the Deity of the Lord with çraddhä is certainly
bhakti, but without worshiping and serving the devotee of the Lord one cannot
execute çuddha-bhakti. This position of serving the Lord but not His pure
devotee can be described as being, at best, a step inside the portals of the
realm of bhakti. The Çrémad Bhägavatam, 10.84.13, explains:

yasyätma-buddhiù kuëape tri-dhätuke
sva-dhéù kalaträdiñu bhauma ijya-dhéù
yat-tértha-buddhiù salile na karhicij
janeñv abhijïeñu sa eva go-kharaù

“‘One who identifies his self as the inert body composed of mucus, bile, and
air, who assumes his wife and family are permanently his own, who thinks an
earthen image or the land of his birth are worshipable, or who sees a place of
pilgrimage as merely the water there, but who never identifies himself with,
feels kinship with, worships or even visits those who are wise in spiritual
truth—such a person is no better than a cow or an ass.’

“The purport of these verses is that without worshiping the Deity of the Lord,
one’s devotion cannot even begin. If one rejects the personal Deity form and
enters into argumentative debate in a futile attempt to attain spiritual
knowledge, then the heart becomes dry and hardened and the true goal of devotion
is lost in bewilderment. However, the worship of the Deity should be performed
with ever-increasing çuddha-cinmaya-buddhi, transcendental consciousness. Though
living in this material world, the jéva is cinmaya-vastu, a conscious spiritual
entity, and amongst all the jévas, the kåñëa-bhaktas are endowed by the Lord
with çuddha-cinmaya-buddhi. Both Çré Kåñëa and His bhakta are purely spiritual
beings and to properly comprehend their transcendental position
sambandha-jïana—knowledge of the interrelationships between çakti, matter; jéva,
the living entity; and Çré Kåñëa—is imperative. If Deity worship is conducted
with sambandha-jïana, then the consequent transcendental understanding will
naturally stimulate both bhakta-sevä, spiritual service to the Lord’s devotees,
and the transcendental esoteric perception and service of the Deity. 

“When there is a perfect marriage of çraddhä with transcendental understanding,
then this is called çästréya-çraddhä, faith based on proper scriptural
conclusions. In contrast, Deity worship bereft of a clear and correct concept of
sambandha-jïana is conducted on the level of mechanical, ritualistic
laukika-çraddhä. Hence, we deduce that although this is the initial stage of
bhakti it is certainly not çuddha-bhakti. This group of devotees has been
described in the Hari-bhakti-viläsa, 1.55, as follows:

gåhéta-viñëu-dékñäko viñëu-püjä-paro naraù
vaiñëavo ‘bhihito ‘bhijïair itaro ‘smäd avaiñëavaù

“‘One who has been initiated with the viñëu-mantra in accordance with the
regulations of scripture and is worshiping the Deity of Çré Viñëu is considered
a Vaiñëava by the learned scholars. All others are non-Vaiñëavas.’

“Kaniñöha-vaiñëavas or präkåta-bhaktas are those who have received initiation
from hereditary gurus, known as kula-gurus, out of family tradition; or those
who feel sentimentally inspired upon seeing others worshiping the Deity of Çré
Viñëu and so then worship the Deity in imitation; or those who have accepted
initiation into the viñëu-mantra with laukika-çraddhä. They are not in the
category of çuddha-bhakti. These unrefined devotees are on the level of
chäyä-bhakti-äbhäsa, a shadow-like semblance of devotion. However, they are
above those on the platform of pratibimba-bhakti-äbhäsa, a reflective distorted
semblance of bhakti, because pratibimba-bhakti-äbhäsa being offensive in nature
is devoid of actual Vaiñëavism. A person elevated to chäyä-bhakti-äbhäsa is
immensely fortunate because from this preliminary stage he may be eventually
promoted to the madhyama-vaiñëava and uttama-vaiñëava platforms. 

“These immature practitioners of chäyä-bhakti-äbhäsa, however, are certainly not
pure devotees. They worship the Deity with sentimental faith and their behaviour
in society is inspired by the ten religious characteristics mentioned earlier.
The scriptural injunctions that direct the conduct of an actual devotee are not
meant for these kaniñöhas, for they cannot even discriminate between a devotee
and a non-devotee. 

“In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 11.2.46, there is an instruction for the
madhyama-vaiñëavas:

ésvare tad-adhéneñu
bäliçeñu dviñatsu ca
prema-maitré-kåpopekñä
yaù karoti sa madhyamaù

“‘An intermediate or second-class devotee, called a madhyama-adhikäré, offers
his love to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is a sincere friend to all the
devotees of the Lord, shows mercy to ignorant people who are innocent, and
disregards those who are envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His
devotees.’

“Naimittika-dharma is not addressed in this verse. The standards of devotional
behaviour enumerated in this verse are a part of nitya-dharma and in the life of
a madhyama-vaiñëava these four practices are the ideal and essential conduct;
and for the madhyama-vaiñëava other etiquettes that are not contrary to the
above four practices may be adopted where necessary. Therefore, we see that the
conduct of the madhyama-vaiñëava is differently directed towards the four
categories of persons: the Supreme Lord, His surrendered devotees, the ignorant
materialists, and the persons inimical towards the Lord or His devotees. The
madhyama-vaiñëava directs his prema, transcendental love, to the Supreme Lord;
his maitré, friendship, to the devotees; his kåpä, compassion, to the ignorant;
and is upekñä, indifferent, towards the envious. 

“As described in the verse, the first characteristic of the madhyama-vaiñëava is
his prema for Éçvara, which indicates Çré Kåñëa, the Lord of all Lords.
Furthermore, prema also implies çuddha-bhakti to Çré Kåñëa. This is how the
scripture Bhakti-rasämåtä-sindhu, Purva 1.1.11, defines çuddha-bhakti:

anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänu-
çélanaà bhaktir uttamä

“‘One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord, Çré
Kåñëa, favourably and without desire for material profit or gain through
fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is pure devotional
service.’

“The symptoms of bhakti just described are first seen in the sädhana practices
of the madhyama-adhikäré-vaiñëava, and extend up to the level of bhäva and
finally into the blossoming of prema. Worship of the Deity form of the Lord with
immature çraddhä is the only characteristic of the kaniñöha practioner. Such a
person does not display the symptoms of çuddha-bhakti, which are
anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà, freedom from material aspiration; jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam,
freedom from the inebriations of impersonalism and fruitive desire; and
änukülyena kåñëänu-çélanaà, absorption in the desire to serve Kåñëa favourably
with transcendental love. As soon as the kaniñöha progresses to manifest these
symptoms in his heart, then he is considered to have become a madhyama-vaiñëava
and thus a genuine devotee. Prior to this, he is a präkåta-bhakta, also known as
a bhakta-äbhäsa or vaiñëava-äbhäsa, a neophyte shadow of a Vaiñëava. The word
kåñëänu-çélanaà refers to kåñëa-prema and is qualified by the word änukülyena,
favourably. Thus, this combination refers to practices that are conducive to the
growth of kåñëa-prema. These are, as we have said, maitré, friendship with one’s
fellow devotees; kåpä, mercy to the ignorant; and upekñä, indifference to the
inimical, which are also are the hallmarks of a madhyama-adhikäré Vaiñëava.

“Now to the topic of second characteristic, the friendly attitude of the
madhyama-vaiñëava adopts towards his fellow surrendered devotees of the
Lord—those who are blessed by çuddha-bhakti. The kaniñöha-vaiñëava is not on the
platform of çuddha-bhakti—that is to say, he does not serve and satisfy the pure
devotees. Therefore, maitré can only be properly extended by the
madhyama-adhikäré to his fellow madhyama-vaiñëavas and the higher level uttama
vaiñëavas.

“In the Caitanya-caritämåta, Çré Caitanya is asked by a devotee of Kuliyä-gräma,
“Please let me know who is actually a Vaiñëava, and what his symptoms are.” In
response, Çré Caitanya describes the different characteristics of the various
levels of Vaiñëavas. As we have explained, the true practice of çuddha-bhakti is
absent in the kaniñöha-vaiñëava, who is solely engaged in Deity worship with
immature çraddhä devoid of sambandha-jïana. The three types of Vaiñëavas
described by Mahäprabhu as worthy of service are within the pure realms of
madhyama and uttama Vaiñëavism. Pure harinäma does not manifest on the tongue of
the kaniñöha-vaiñëava because his chanting is on the level of chäyä nämäbhäsa,
the shadow form of harinäma, and therefore the kaniñöha-vaiñëava does not
warrant service. 

“Çré Caitanya instructed the madhyama-vaiñëava-gåhastha to serve these three
types of pure Vaiñëavas: vaiñëava, one who has chanted once harinäma purely;
vaiñëava-tara, one who constantly chants harinäma; and vaiñëava-tama, one whose
presence spontaneously inspires others to chant harinäma. These three grades of
pure Vaiñëavas alone are worthy of his worship. The madhyama-gåhastha is
instructed to serve only these three, who chant pure harinäma; not the
kaniñöha-vaiñëava, who chants only the shadow form of harinäma and is therefore
not a suitable object of service. Only the madhyama and uttama Vaiñëavas who
utter çuddha-näma are fit to be served. 

“Service to the Vaiñëavas should be in accordance with their respective levels
of advancement. The word maitré encompasses association, discussion and service.
When one sees a çuddha-bhakta must greet him and offer respects immediately,
give full hospitality affectionately, discuss Kåñëa conscious topics with him,
and care for all his needs. One should serve him properly in all these ways. One
must be extremely cautious not to envy a çuddha-bhakta. He should not be shown
irreverence or criticized even inadvertently and he must not be disregarded
because of some physical deformity or ailment.

“The third practice of the madhyama-vaiñëava is the bestowal of kåpä upon the
ignorant. The word bäliçä implies an ignorant person without spiritual
knowledge, or an idiot, fool, etc. Gross, uneducated materialists whose false
ego and strong material attachments do not allow them to cultivate çraddhä to
the Supreme Lord are bäliçä. The bäliçä are without correct spiritual guidance,
yet, fortunately, they are uncontaminated by false philosophies such as
impersonal mäyäväda. Thus, their saving grace is that they have no antipathy
towards bhakti or bhaktas. Even a so-called highly learned scholar who has of
yet failed to achieve çraddhä in the Supreme Personality of Godhead may be
accurately characterised as a bäliçä, ignoramus. 

“In addition, there is the kaniñöha-adhikäré. Though he is at the doorstep of
bhakti, he lacks the proper grasp of sambandha-jïana; thus, he is deprived of
çuddha-bhakti. As long as this condition persists, he is also known as a bäliçä.
Of course, when he faithfully acquires the knowledge of sambandha-tattva and
begins to chant pure harinäma in the association of pure devotees, his
bäliçätva, ignorance, is dissipated and he is elevated to the level of a
madhyama-vaiñëava. These are some of the different kinds of bäliçä and it is
very essential for the madhyama-vaiñëava to show mercy to them. The
madhyama-vaiñëava must deal graciously with the bäliçä, as he would do with an
honoured guest—but this is not enough. To show real mercy to the bäliçä, he must
ensure that the bäliçä develops çraddhä in pure devotional service and a taste
for chanting harinäma.

“The unknowing bäliçäs are uneducated in the teachings of the scriptures, and so
are susceptible to falling prey to the lures of bad company. The
madhyama-vaiñëava, being compassionate, offers the bäliçäs his association,
instructing them about the scriptures and the glories of harinäma. An ailing
person cannot treat himself—he needs a doctor. Just as the angry and frustrated
outbursts of a sick patient are excusable, the misdemeanours of the bäliçä are
also to be forgiven. That, indeed, is an act of mercy.

“The bäliçä may be easily diverted from bhakti at any time, his consciousness
being clouded with misconceptions, such as believing in karma-käëòa; being
sometimes drawn to speculative knowledge; worshiping the Deity of the Lord with
ulterior motives; having faith in the yoga process; being indifferent to
association with pure Vaiñëavas—something which would actually be beneficial for
him; being attached to the rules and regulations of varëäsrama; and so on. A
diseased person cannot treat himself; he must be given the compassionate care of
an expert physician who tolerates the expected misbehaviour of his patient. By
administering his association, compassion, and spiritual instructions, the
madhyama-vaiñëava can correct the wrong views of the kaniñöha-vaiñëava and
promote him to the level of a madhyama-adhikäré pure devotee. This practice of
mercy is essential for the madhyama-adhikäré-vaiñëava.

“Once a person begins to worship the Deity of the Supreme Lord with a trace of
actual bhakti, it is to be understood that he has sown the seed of his own good
fortune and that he is free from corrupt ideologies. Therefore, it is understood
that he possesses a touch of çraddhä. Whereas, a person who worships the Deity
while indoctrinated with the mäyävädé philosophy and therefore has not the
slightest çraddhä for the actual Deity form of the Lord is thus an offender.
Hence, the expression çraddhayehate, with çraddhä, is used in the Çrémad
Bhägavatam to describe the kaniñöha-vaiñëava. The heart of the mäyävädé
philosopher is contaminated by the false conclusion that the Supreme Absolute
Brahman, the Para-brahman, is ultimately formless. On this basis, he falsely
considers that the worshipable transcendental Deity form of the Lord is
ultimately a product of the imagination. Holding such tenets, how deep can his
so-called çraddhä be in the Deity form? Therefore, there is a distinct
difference between the Deity worship of the mäyävädé and the Deity worship of
the very neophyte kaniñöha-adhikäré. 

“If for no other Vaiñëava characteristic, then it is for being free from the
abomination of the mäyäväda doctrine that the kaniñöha-adhikäré has been awarded
the status of a präkåta-vaiñëava, a neophyte materialistic Vaiñëava. On the
strength of his minuscule Vaiñëava quality and through the mercy of a pure
devotee, he is eligible to rise to the perfectional stage in devotional service.
However, the genuine mercy of the madhyama-adhikäré pure devotee is
indispensable for the further progress of the kaniñöha-vaiñëava and by such
mercy his Deity worship and chanting can quickly become purified of their
tainted, shadowy nature and acquire the true transcendental character.

“Now we come to the fourth quality, upekñä, indifference, neglect and avoidance,
of those who are envious. Firstly, an envious person has to be defined and the
different types of envious persons have to be delineated. Dveña, enmity, is a
human trait also known as matsaratä, envy and hate. This heinous propensity is
the exact opposite of prema. The Supreme Lord alone is ultimately the sole
recipient of prema. Antipathy against the Lord is known as dveña of which there
are five kinds: (1) scepticism, not having faith in God; (2) the belief that the
Supreme Lord is nothing more than a natural potency of the creation, which
automatically brings about the result of one’s karma; (3) not believing in the
transcendental form of the Lord; (4) not accepting the position of the jéva as
an eternal servant of the Lord; and (5) the absence of mercy.

“Persons who are polluted by such dveña can never attain pure devotion, and they
do not possess even a slight tinge of the inchoate devotion possessed by the
kaniñöha-adhikäré in his Deity worship. These five dveñas are generally found in
persons overly attached to the material world and the sense enjoyment thereof.
The third and fourth types of dveña are sometimes accompanied by the propensity
for suicidal renunciation often found in mäyävädé sannyäsés, which culminates in
spiritual self-annihilation. 

“How should the devotees deal with such envious persons? It is recommended one
should avoid their company. Upekñä, however, means neither that one should put a
stop to all the usual human exchanges, nor that one should refuse help to such
bewildered persons. On the contrary, if an envious person is in danger or in
distress, everything should be done to ameliorate his agony. A gåhastha-vaiñëava
has to interact with so many different persons in the course of his daily life.
Through marriage, he acquires many new acquaintances. While shopping, while
taking care of family matters, in business, in property deals, in sickness, in
maintenance, in all these matters and more, normal human dealings are an ongoing
and unavoidably necessary performance. 

“How then is it possible for the gåhastha-vaiñëava, with one final stroke, to
curtail all simple day to day interactions with this envious lot? This is not
the meaning of upekñä. Upekñä is to terminate all spiritual exchanges with the
atheists, not social exchanges. As a result of one’s karma—the resultant
material reactions from previous lives—even some of one’s own family members may
be dveñés, envious persons. Should they be excluded? No, that is not the
solution. 

“Social exchanges are part of human behaviour, so the envious persons should be
dealt with, but without getting into deep involvement or emotional relationships
with them. In contrast, for spiritual practice serious commitment is mandatory
and spiritual association with one’s fellow devotees means to interact upon the
spiritual platform by discussing transcendental topics, serving and assisting
one another in spiritual progress. Thus, one should avoid the association of
persons with whom such spiritual practices are not possible or suitable. This is
upekñä.”

“An envious person is generally very self-opinionated; hence, if he hears
praises or explanations about the science of pure devotion, he will immediately
start an unnecessary argument, which will be of use neither to you, nor to him.
Instead of such barren debates, one should simply restrain one’s dealings to a
social level with such types. If someone whimsically proposes to include the
envious persons into the ranks of the bäliçä so that he may practice
compassionate association upon them, then such a person should first understand
that this course of action would be very detrimental to his own spiritual
progress. Certainly, one must help others, but not without caution or care.

“It is essential for the madhyama-adhikäré çuddha-bhakta, to act according to
these four guidelines. Any slackness in this regard will culminate in
malpractice, increased lethargy, and apathy towards executing spiritual
discipline. In the end, the deviation will become too overwhelming. 

“Thus, it is stated in the Çrémad Bhagavatam, 11.21.2:

sve sve ’dhikäre yä niñöhä
sa guëaù parikértitaù
viparyayas tu doñaù syäd
ubhayor eña niçcayaù 

“‘A person’s steadfast attachment to practice according to his level of
advancement is his real qualification; deviation from practice suitable to his
level of advancement becomes a disqualification. These are the symptoms of good
behaviour and faulty behaviour, piety and impiety.’

“Thus, in accordance with scriptural injunctions the prime duties of a
madhyama-adhikäré çuddha-bhakta are to cultivate love for the Supreme Lord,
friendship with pure devotees of the Lord, compassion for the innocent, and
aloofness from the envious. The degree of friendship that the madhyama-bhakta
establishes with other bhaktas of this level should correspond to the level of
their devotion. Similarly, the degree of compassion he bestows upon the ignorant
will depend upon the sincerity and state of knowledge of that innocent person.
In the same way, avoidance of association with envious persons is also in
accordance with the degree of their envy. The madhyama-adhikäré çuddha-bhakta
must carefully consider all these points and then conduct his spiritual life
accordingly. Simultaneously, his social behaviour should be conducted with
simplicity and faithful obedience to these guidelines—and always with
consideration of the ultimate spiritual goal.”

At this juncture Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé of Baòagächi village interjected,
“How do the uttama-adhikäré çuddha-bhaktas conduct themselves?” 

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé replied, “Dear son, when you have already asked me a
question please allow me to complete my answer. I am aged; my memory is
weakening. Whatever I have in mind I might forget.” 

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé was a strict and straightforward devotee. True, he never
looked for fault in others, but he would instantly point out something that was
out of place. Everyone fell silent upon his admonition. Then after a few moments
Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé again offered his obeisances to the sitting place of Çré
Nityänanda under the banyan tree and resumed his dissertation, “As the bhakti of
the madhyama-adhikäré ascends to the level of prema, he gradually becomes an
uttama-adhikäré. The characteristics of an uttama-adhikäré are mentioned in the
Çrémad Bhagavatam, 11.2.45:

çré-havir uväca

sarva-bhüteñu yaù paçyed
bhagavad-bhävam ätmanaù
bhütäni bhagavaty ätmany
eña bhägavatottamaù

“‘Çré Havir said, “The uttama-adhikäré devotee sees within everything the Soul
of all souls, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. Consequently he
sees everything in relation to the Supreme Lord and understands that everything
that exists is eternally situated within the Lord.’

“The uttama-adhikäré is also known as an uttama-vaiñëava, the most advanced and
elevated Vaiñëava. He sees everything in terms of prema and thus prema is the
constant emotion that adorns the character of an uttama-vaiñëava. At times,
various differing bhävas manifest in his personality but they are all
transformations of prema. Kindly observe the character of Çréla Çukadeva
Gosvämé, an uttama-bhägavata, topmost devotee. He referred to Kaàsa as
bhoja-päàçula, the most sinful of the Bhoja dynasty. Ostensibly, such an
expletive appears to be a display of anger towards Kaàsa but actually the
statement is stimulated by and is thus a manifestation of kåñëa-prema. When
çuddha-prema becomes the all-in-all, the very life force of a devotee, he is to
be known as a bhägavatottama. Upon this platform of devotion, the four
distinctions in attitude—prema, maitré, kåpä, and upekñä—that are the hallmarks
of the madhyama-vaiñëava cease and the bhägavatottama exudes only kåñëa-prema.
He does not discriminate among a neophyte, an intermediate, or an advanced
Vaiñëava, or even between a Vaiñëava and a non-Vaiñëava. This elevated position
is very rarely attained.

“Do you notice something unique? The neophyte kaniñöha-vaiñëava is generally not
enthusiastic about serving Vaiñëavas, and the topmost uttama-vaiñëava makes no
discrimination between a Vaiñëava and a non-Vaiñëava because he sees all jévas
established as servants of Kåñëa. Consequently, we see that only the
intermediate madhyama-vaiñëava consciously practices respect and service to the
Vaiñëavas in a deliberate sense. Thus, the intermediate madhyama-vaiñëava will
serve all three categories of Vaiñëava: vaiñëava, vaiñëava-tara, and
vaiñëava-tama. The madhyama-vaiñëava must serve each Vaiñëava in accordance with
his status. Only the uttama-vaiñëava does not consider or analyse whether a
Vaiñëava is kaniñöha, madhyama, or uttama before he interacts with him. If a
madhyama-vaiñëava artificially adopts this mentality, he becomes an aparädhi,
offender. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu revealed these truths of Vaiñëava etiquette in
a very concise manner in His discussions with the residents of Kuléna-gräma. All
His instructions on this topic are more significant for the madhyama-vaiñëavas
than the original Vedas. Actually, what is the definition of çruti—the Vedas?
The answer: The words of the Supreme Lord are Veda.” 

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé fell silent after he had spoken these words. Çré Nityänanda
däsa Bäbäjé of Baòagächi now spoke with palms folded, “May I ask a further
question?” Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé replied, “You may do so without hesitation?”

The young Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé enquired, “Respected Bäbäjé, into which
category of Vaiñëava would one place me? Am I a kaniñöha or a madhyama? I am
certainly not an uttama-vaiñëava.”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé smiled and said, “Is anyone who has received the name
Nityänanda däsa constrained from becoming an uttama-vaiñëava? My beloved Çré
Nitäi is extremely merciful. He offers prema even after being beaten. If one
utters His name and becomes His servant, everything can be achieved easily.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “With utmost humility, I beg to know my present
level.”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “Then you must reveal everything about yourself. If Çré
Nityänanda prompts me, then I may say something of relevance.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa started, “I was born into a low-class family in a village
upon the bank of the River Padmavaté. I married young and never left the
righteous path. However, after my wife’s early demise I developed detachment
from family life. In Baòagächi, I met some renounced Vaiñëavas who had left
household life. I saw they were well respected by others. Desiring such respect
and swayed by the passing mood of renunciation caused by my wife’s demise I
ended up taking bheka initiation from these Vaiñëavas in Baòagächi. A short time
later my mind was attacked by immoral thoughts and became very difficult to
control. Fortunately for me, I happened upon the good association of a true
Vaiñëava—presently he is in Vraja. He gave me sound advice and kept me by his
side; in this way, he gradually purified my consciousness. Now I am not troubled
by any mundane desires and have developed a taste for chanting harinäma; daily I
chant one hundred thousand names upon my tulasé beads. I have realized that
näma, the holy name, and nämé, the possessor of the holy name, the Supreme Lord,
are transcendental and non-different. I observe Ekädaçé vows strictly according
to the scriptures and daily offer gee lamp and water the sacred tulasé plant.

“When the Vaiñëavas sing in kértana I participate gladly and my heart stirs with
spiritual exultation. I drink the caraëämåta of the Vaiñëavas with relish and
daily study the devotional scriptures such as the Caitanya Bhägavata and
Caitanya-caritämåta. I have lost interest in eating elaborately and putting on
fine clothes. Upon hearing mundane prattle, I feel ill at ease and
disinterested. When I see the bhäva of the pure Vaiñëavas I desire to roll upon
the ground at their feet, but must admit that I do it mostly for winning acclaim
and attention. Kindly now tell me to which level do I presently belong, and
accordingly what are my duties?”

With a smile, Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé looked in the direction of Vaiñëava däsa
Bäbäjé and said, “Let us hear from you. To which level does Nityänanda däsa
belong?” 

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé replied, “From what we’ve just heard. I would say he has
progressed from the kaniñöha-adhikäré neophyte stage to the madhyama-adhikäré
intermediate stage.”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “I second that opinion.” 

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “Wonderful! Now I know my level of spiritual
progress directly from the lips of the Vaiñëava mahätmäs, great souls. Kindly
shower your grace upon me so that I may be gradually promoted to the stage of
uttama-adhikäré.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé continued his assessment, “At the time of your formal
initiation, bheka, you were motivated by pratiñöhä, mundane desire for position,
fame, and adoration. Though you were not eligible for bheka, you still accepted
that position; that was an offence and so you were becoming degraded.
Fortunately, however, you received the kåpä of a pure Vaiñëava, which pulled you
out of the mire.” 

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “Even now slight residues of desire for pratiñöhä
remain in my heart. I think that by shedding tears and exhibiting bhäva I can
impress others and receive respect and honour from them.”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “Try diligently to rid yourself of this, otherwise you run
the big risk of gradually constricting your devotion. If that were to happen,
you would be demoted to the level of kaniñöha-adhikäré. Even though a Vaiñëava
may resolutely drive away lust, anger, greed, etc., the desire for pratiñöhä
does not leave easily and is truly detrimental. Especially beneficial for the
sädhaka-vaiñëava is that he categorically rejects chäyä-bhäva-äbhäsa, the
shaming of spiritual emotions, and sincerely endeavours for even a minute drop
of real bhäva at the heights of his devotional feelings.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé fell at the feet of Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé and begged
for his vaiñëava-kåpä, the grace of a Vaiñëava. Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé reacted out
of humility, lifting up Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé and embracing him. The result
of being touched by a great Vaiñëava is astounding: Incessant tears cascaded
down from the eyes of Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé. Awed by his own reaction, Çré
Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé was overcome with deep humility and continuously
murmured, “I am so low and wretched, I am a fallen soul!” Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé
again embraced him as tears streaked down his own quivering cheeks. What
glorious spiritual sentiments! Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé felt the fulfilment of
his life. When after a while the exultation subsided, Çré Nityänanda däsa
Bäbäjé, now looking up to Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé as his guru, asked, “What are the
mukhya, principal, and gauëa, secondary, symptoms of a kaniñöha-adhikäré?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “The mukhya symptom of a kaniñöha-adhikäré is faith in the
eternal form of Bhagavän, which results in the worship of the Deity form of
Bhagavän. The gauëa symptoms of a kaniñöha-adhikäré are the devotional
activities he performs such as hearing, chanting, remembering, offering prayers,
and so on.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “One cannot become a Vaiñëava unless and until one
develops implicit faith in the eternal transcendental form of Bhagavän, nor can
one become a Vaiñëava without worshiping the Deity through the regulations of
çästra. That these two symptoms are mukhya is easily comprehensible, however I
find it difficult to grasp why hearing and chanting, etc., are considered the
gauëa symptoms. Why are these deemed subordinate?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “The kaniñöha-adhikäré cannot properly perceive the science
of çuddha-bhakti. Certainly, hearing, and chanting, etc., are the limbs of
çuddha-bhakti, however, as the kaniñöha-adhikäré is unable to realize the
transcendental nature of çuddha-bhakti, such devotional activities like hearing
and chanting do not take the mukhya position in his spiritual practice.
Therefore, for the kaniñöha-adhikäré these activities are designated as being at
the gauëa level. Another reason why they are gauëa is that the kaniñöha-adhikäré
performs these activities under the influence of the three guëas—the material
modes of: sattva, raja, and tama. Only when hearing, chanting, and remembering,
etc., are executed on the nirguëa platform, which by definition is beyond the
influences of the three guëas, can they be designated as the limbs of
çuddha-bhakti. And as soon as these activities rise above the three guëas, the
level of madhyama-adhikäré is attained.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “The kaniñöha-vaiñëava suffers from anyäbhiläña,
material hankering, which manifests as desire for karma, jïäna, the mystic
powers of añtanga-yoga, and mundane sensuality. How then may he be recognised as
a devotee?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “The root of bhakti is çraddhä, faith. Therefore, one who
has developed çraddhä is eligible for executing bhakti and is certainly at the
threshold of pure bhakti. The word çraddhä includes viçväsa, firm belief. Since
the kaniñöha-bhakta has viçväsa in the eternal Deity form of the Supreme Lord,
then he is indeed a proper candidate for bhakti.” 

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “At which stage will he actually attain bhakti?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “The kaniñöha-bhakta becomes elevated to madhyama-adhikäré
when his desire for karma and jïäna, etc., begins to wane; when concomitantly he
aspires only for ananya-bhakti, unalloyed devotional service; and when instead
of enthusiastically extending hospitality to all guests, he realizes the
particular spiritual benefit of serving the Vaiñëava devotees. At this time, the
kaniñöha-bhakta becomes a çuddha-bhakta of the madhyama-adhikäré status.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “It is said that çuddha-bhakti begins to manifest
with the attainment of sambandha-jïäna—realization of the eternal relationships
between the jévas; Bhagavan; and the çakti of Bhagavän. Therefore, how and when
does sambandha-jïäna manifest, bestowing the eligibility for çuddha-bhakti?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “As soon as one’s knowledge is completely cleansed of the
minutest traces of mäyävädé philosophy, both sambandha-jïäna and çuddha-bhakti
manifest simultaneously.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “What is the period of time required for this?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “It all depends upon the strength of one’s sukåti—the
higher the sukåti, the quicker the result.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “What are the initial results of sukåti-bala, the
power of previous piety?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “One attains sädhu-saìga, association with saintly
persons.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “And then what are the step by step developments as
a result of sädhu-saìga?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “The Çrémad Bhägavatam, 3.25.25, states:

atäà prasaìgän mama vérya-saàvido
bhavanti håt-karëa-rasäyanäù kathäù
taj-joñaëäd äçv apavarga-vartmani
çraddhä ratir bhaktir anukramiñyati

“‘In the association of pure devotees, discussion of the pastimes and activities
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is very pleasing and satisfying to the
ears and heart. By cultivating such knowledge, one gradually advances along the
path of spiritual liberation. Thus, one is freed from material contamination and
one’s attraction to the Supreme Personality of Godhead becomes fixed. Then real
devotion and devotional service begin.’

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “What factors help one obtain sädhu-saìga?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “As I’ve already mentioned before, sädhu-saìga is caused by
sukåti, as corroborated in the Çrémad Bhägavatam, 10.51.53:

bhaväpavargo bhramato yadä bhavej
janasya tarhy acyuta sat-samägamaù
sat-saìgamo yarhi tadaiva sad-gatau
parävareçe tvayi jäyate matiù

“‘When the time arrives for the cessation of the material life of a wandering
soul, O Acyuta, that soul attains sädhu-saìga. And when he associates with the
sädhus there awakens in him devotion unto You, Who are the goal of the sädhus
and the Lord of all causes and their effects.’

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “If the kaniñöha devotee develops çraddhä and an
inclination for arcana as a result of his association with sädhus, then why do
we say that he does not serve the Vaiñëavas?” 

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “Gradually, on account of sädhu-saìga one develops çraddhä
in the eternal form of the Supreme Lord’s Deity. However, what is imperative is
that Deity worship and service to devotees are performed simultaneously. Until
çraddhä has developed to this level it is too weak to give one the eligibility
to execute ananya-çuddha-bhakti.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “What are the gradual steps that elevate a
kaniñöha-bhakta?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “The kaniñöha devotee has developed çraddhä in the eternal
form of the Supreme Lord and the divinity of His Deity form, but he is not
purified from mundane desire for karma, jïäna, name and fame, etc. However, he
performs daily Deity worship and as a matter of coincidence he meets sädhus at
his place of worship who are greeted with the hospitality naturally accorded to
any respected guest. The kaniñöha keenly observes the activities and behaviour
of these sädhus. He absorbs the spiritual discussions of the devotees on the
different devotional texts. By such constant observation and hearing, he
develops attraction and affection for the ways and words of those devotees. He
then begins to rectify his own faults and weaknesses of character. Gradually the
mundane desires for karma and jïäna begin to reduce to the extent that his heart
and consciousness are cleansed and he becomes unburdened of anyäbhiläñitä,
material hankering. Listening to Kåñëa-conscious topics and the transcendental
philosophy expounded by the sädhus, his knowledge and realization of the
scriptures increases. In the process of analysing the transcendental truths
about the Supreme Lord Çré Hari, harinäma, and the devotional processes of
hearing, chanting, etc., his realization of sambandha-jïäna and his own innate
spiritual identity expand. When this initial process of development matures, he
gains the adhikära to enter the madhyama-adhikäré level. Only then does he
associate with devotees and serve the devotees in the true sense. At this stage
he no longer perceives the sädhus as ordinary guests, but serves them
reverentially as gurus.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “Many kaniñöha-bhaktas do not progress, what is the
reason for this?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “If the kaniñöha-bhakta’s, dveñi-saìga—association with the
inimical agnostics, atheists and impersonalists, etc.,—is frequent, very soon he
loses the kaniñöha status and becomes entangled in the pursuit of karma and
jïäna, etc. In some cases the kaniñöha neither progresses nor regresses, just
remaining at the kaniñöha level.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “In which cases?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “In cases where both sädhu-saìga and dveñi-saìga exercise
equal influence upon the kaniñöha, his devotion maintains the status quo.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “What ensures certain progress?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “When devotee association is frequent and powerful and
non-devotee association minimal, the kaniñöha progresses swiftly.”

Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “How would you describe the tendency of the kaniñöha to
perform both puëyä, piety, and päpa, impious deeds?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “In the initial stages of a kaniñöha’s devotional
development this tendency to puëyä and päpa is very similar to that of the karmé
and that of the jïäné. However, with the burgeoning of bhakti, the propensity
for puëyä and päpa reduces in concomitant degrees as the endeavour to satisfy
the Supreme Lord Çré Hari gains strength.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “Revered master, I have understood your explanations
of the kaniñöha devotee, now kindly describe the mukhya symptoms of a
madhyama-adhikäré-bhakta.”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “The mukhya symptoms of a madhyama-adhikäré-bhakta are
first, ananya-bhakti to Çré Kåñëa; second, four qualities are found in his
dealing with his fellow devotees, which are ätmä-buddhi, he considers the
devotees more dear than his own self; mamatä-buddhi, intimate affection for the
devotees; ijya-buddhi, he considers the devotees worshipable; and tértha-buddhi,
he considers them places of pilgrimage; third, being naturally compassionate the
madhyama-adhikäré-bhakta is mercifully disposed towards those who are ignorant
about the Absolute Truth; and, finally, fourth, he strictly avoids the company
of those inimical to Bhagavän. 

“The principal activity of the madhyama-adhikäré-bhakta is to execute
bhakti-sädhana, devotion in practice. This consists of abhidheya, devotional
performances, within the sphere of fully realized sambandha-jïana, eternal
knowledge, to attain prayojana, the prime perfection, kåñëa-prema. Essentially,
this means that when the madhyama-adhikäré-bhakta performs hearing and chanting,
etc., in the association of sädhus he does so offenselessly.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “What are the gauëa symptoms of the
madhyama-adhikäré-bhakta?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “The gauëa symptoms are seen in the way the
madhyama-adhikäré-bhakta lives his life. The madhyama-adhikäré-bhakta lives
fully surrendered to the desire of Kåñëa and his life is so arranged as to
execute bhakti favourably.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “Does he still commit päpa and aparädha?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “In the earlier stages, the tendencies to commit päpa and
aparädha may be slightly present, but gradually they will dissipate. These
residual tendencies are just like chickpeas being quickly ground away into
powder. Whatever päpa and aparädha that sometimes shows in the beginning stages
of madhyama-adhikäré are minute residues, but soon they will disappear
completely. Thus, the life of the madhyama-adhikäré-bhakta is characterised by
çuddha-bhakti with the practice of yukta-vairägya, appropriate renunciation.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “Do they hope for a long life?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “They desire to live only to mature and intensify their
bhajana. They aspire neither for a long life, nor even for mukti.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “Why do they not desire for death? What pleasure is
there to remain alive in this body? Only after death can one by the mercy of Çré
Kåñëa become eternally situated in one’s svarüpa, original spiritual identity?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “All their aspirations are obedient to the will of Çré
Kåñëa, thus they do not have any wish which is not Kåñëa’s wish. Having realized
that all events in their life occur on the express wish of Krsna, their lives
are surrendered—they have no need to express any independent desire.” 

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “I now have a proper understanding of the symptoms
of the madhyama-adhikäré-bhaktas. Is an uttama-adhikäré-bhakta seen to have any
gauëa symptoms?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “If at all gauëa symptoms are to be discerned then they are
the natural activities of his body; and even then these activities are to such
an extent subservient to the demands of his kåñëa-prema that such gauëa symptoms
are practically impossible to identify.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “Revered master, I know that
kaniñöha-adhikäré-bhaktas are not encouraged to leave family and home, the
madhyama-adhikäré-bhaktas can be both in household life and in the renounced
order, but can an uttama-adhikäré-bhakta be in household life?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “These three grades—kaniñöha, madhyama, and uttama—are
assigned according to the level of bhakti and elevation to one of these grades
does not depend upon whether one is a gåhasta or a sannyäsé. An
uttama-adhikäré-bhakta devotee can very well be in gåhasta life—all the devotees
of Vraja are gåhastas and yet they are the most elevated
uttama-adhikäré-bhaktas. Many amongst the most intimate associates of our
beloved Çréman Mahäprabhu are gåhasta-bhaktas and again they are
uttama-adhikärés. Çréla Räya Rämänanda is an illustrious example.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “Dear master, how then should a
madhyama-adhikäré-bhakta in the sannyäsa order and an uttama-adhikäré-bhakta in
gåhasta life behave towards each other?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “Vaiñëava etiquette demands that a lower order bhakta offer
prostrate obeisances to the more elevated bhakta. This stipulation applies
specifically to the madhyama-adhikäré-bhakta, because the uttama-adhikäré-bhakta
does not expect or demand any respect or obeisances for himself, for he sees the
presence of the Supreme Lord within every living entity.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “Is it the duty of Vaiñëavas to assemble in large
groups and make arrangements for mahotsavas, festivals, to honour the
bhägavata-prasäda, sanctified food remnants of the Lord?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “In the course of some work if many Vaiñëavas come together
and a madhyama-adhikäré gåhasta-vaiñëava desires to offer them prasädam, there
can be no objection from a spiritual standpoint. However, care must be taken not
to make the affair very elaborate and ostentatious then the whole endeavour may
become mundane, coloured by the material mode of passion. Certainly, it is
recommended that one should invite pure Vaiñëavas and with care and affection
serve them prasädam. Such observances manifest real love and respect for the
pure Vaiñëavas.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “In our village Baòagächi a caste called
vaiñëava-santäna, the children of Vaiñëavas, has sprung up. The
kaniñöha-vaiñëavas of the village invite them for prasädam and call it
vaiñëava-sevä, serving the Vaiñëavas. Is this correct?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “Have these vaiñëava-santäna attained çuddha-bhakti?”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “I do not see the symptoms of çuddha-bhakti in any
of them. They introduce themselves simply as Vaiñëavas and some of them even
wear the loincloth of the renunciate even though they are householders.”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “I am at a loss to explain why such practices are becoming
prevalent. Certainly, they are undesirable. I can only surmise that it is
happening because the kaniñöha-bhaktas are unable to discern who is a true
Vaiñëava.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “Should the vaiñëava-santäna caste command a special
position of honour?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “Honour is for those who are actually true Vaiñëavas. If
the vaiñëava-santäna members are çuddha-bhaktas, then they should be offered
honour according to their individual level of çuddha-bhakti.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “What if the vaiñëava-santäna members are simply a
community of ordinary people in material society?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “Then they should be respected according to their status in
material society, and certainly not honoured in the same way as true Vaiñëavas,
or even be considered true Vaiñëavas. Always try to remember the instructions of
Çréman Mahäprabhu regarding Vaiñëava behaviour in the third verse of the
Çikñäñöaka:

tåëäd api sunécena
 taror api sahiñëunä
amäninä mänadena
kértanéyaù sadä hariù

“‘One should not expect any honour for oneself but must be ready to offer
respect to everyone, each according to his spiritual elevation. A Vaiñëava must
be accorded the respect and honour due to a Vaiñëava. One who is not a Vaiñëava
must be shown the proper respect becoming for a human being. If a devotee fails
to develop this attitude of offering appropriate respect to all, then the
eligibility to chant harinäma purely and constantly is not born.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “How does one give up the aspiration for respect?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “One must relinquish false pride, and not proudly think, ‘I
am a brähmaëa,’ ‘I am accomplished,’ ‘I am well-versed in the çästras,’ ‘I am a
Vaiñëava,’ ‘I am a renounced person,’ etc. One must never even dream of
receiving any respect because of such qualities. People may well offer respect,
but one should simply acknowledge that one is unworthy, insignificant, indigent
and humbler than a blade of grass.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “Indeed, by your words I can understand that without
dainya, humility, and dayä, compassion, one cannot be a Vaiñëava.”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “Quite true.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “Does this indicate that Bhaktidevé, the goddess of
çuddha-bhakti, is dependent upon humility and compassion?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “Bhaktidevé is independent. She is herself beauty
personified and the most valuable jewel; she does not require support from any
other excellences. Dainya and dayä are not separate or independent excellences,
but inherent to the very character of Bhaktidevé herself. When the devotee
feels: ‘I am an eternal servant of Kåñëa, without possessions and penniless, and
Çré Kåñëa is everything to me,’—the emotion expressed therein is dainya.
Essentially, bhakti is the bhäva of tender affection for Kåñëa; while tender
affection for other living entities—who are all eternal servitors of the Lord—is
dayä. Therefore, both dainya and dayä are naturally embodied in bhakti. Kñamä,
forgiveness, is a bhäva between dainya and dayä. When the bhäva of dainya: ‘I am
wretched and lowly, how could I be the judge and punisher of anyone?’ mingles
with the bhäva of dayä the feeling of kñamä is produced. Therefore, kñamä is
also inherent to bhakti. 

“Çré Kåñëa, the jéva, the subservience of the jéva to Çré Kåñëa, and the
unwanted sojourn of the materially conditioned jéva within this mundane world
are all satya, truth. Therefore, bhakti must also be satya because all these
truths are based upon the relationship between Kåñëa and the jéva, which is in
essence bhakti. Hence, we see that satya, dainya, dayä, and kñamä are all
intrinsic to the very nature of Bhaktidevé.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “How should the Vaiñëava behave with persons of
other systems of dharma?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “The Çrémad Bhagavatam, 1.2.26, states:

näräyaëa-kaläù çäntä
bhajanti hy anasüyavaù

“‘Saintly personalities who are fully peaceful and free of the propensity to
enviously criticize others worship the all-blissful forms of the Supreme Lord,
Çré Näräyaëa, and His plenary portions.’

“Actually, there is no dharma other than vaiñëava-dharma. All other religions
propagated in the world, including those to be propagated in future years,
factually comprise different steps upon the ascension to vaiñëava-dharma, or
alternatively they are deviations from the essential vaiñëava-dharma. When
another religion complements vaiñëava-dharma, the devotee should respect that
religion in accordance with its degree of purity. Thus, the followers of those
religions, which actually constitute different stages on the path to pure
vaiñëava-dharma, must be accorded proper appreciation and respect. And, on the
other hand, whilst dealing with groups that have deviated from pure
vaiñëava-dharma, one must never bear malice, but engage oneself in the culture
of one’s own devotional truth. Thus, devotees should never be hateful and show
intolerance towards other religious practices. When the auspicious moment comes
in a person’s life, he will easily embrace pure vaiñëava-dharma, of this there
is no doubt.”

Çré Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé, “Is it necessary to actively propagate
vaiñëava-dharma?”

Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé, “Indeed, by all means, it is the duty of everyone to do so.
Our beloved Lord Çréman Mahäprabhu has entrusted everyone with the
responsibility to preach, as stated in the Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Ädi-lélä
7.92 and 9.36:

näca, gäo, bhakta-saìge kara saìkértana
kåñëa-näma upadeçi’ tära’ sarva-jana

“‘My dear child, continue dancing, chanting and performing saìkértana in
association with devotees. Furthermore, go out and preach the value of chanting
kåñëa-näma, for by this process You will be able to deliver all fallen souls.’

ataeva ämi äjïä diluì sabäkäre
yähäì tähäì prema-phala deha’ yäre täre

“‘Therefore, I order every man within this universe to accept this Kåñëa
consciousness movement and distribute it everywhere.’

“However, one should remember that an unworthy candidate must first be made
qualified before one instructs him in the glories of kåñëa-näma. In certain
situations, for instance in speaking to inimical persons, upekñä is required and
so one should not speak anything that would spark off bitter controversy and
thus cause impediments in the preaching work.”

The nectarean words of Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé had had a wonderful effect upon Çré
Nityänanda däsa Bäbäjé—he was overcome with prema and began to roll upon the
ground. The assembled Vaiñëavas broke out into loud chanting of kåñëa-näma, and
they all paid prostrated obeisances to Çré Haridäsa Bäbäjé. Thereafter, the
meeting in that secluded grove broke up and everyone gradually went away to
their individual dwellings.

Thus ends the eight chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma and Vaiñëava
Behaviour

JDH 9: Nitya-dharma and Material Science and Civilization

Chapter Nine
Nitya-dharma and Material Science and Civilization

Almost four years have now gone by since Lähiré Mahäçaya came to Godruma and
associating with the Vaiñëavas of that sacred place has had a greatly purifying
effect upon him. Now he is continuously chanting even whilst performing his
daily chores. His lean frame is covered by sparse clothes and he has given up
using any footwear, even wooden clogs. He has overcome the false pride of his
high caste to such an extent that whenever he sees a Vaiñëava he immediately
offers daëòavats and with the utmost humility places the dust from the feet of
the Vaiñëava upon his head. If anyone refuses to comply, he remains undeterred,
using gentle force to achieve his goal. He is always looking for and eating
eagerly the prasädam remnants of the pure Vaiñëavas. From time to time, his sons
visit him with the idea of bringing him back home, but in view of his absorbed
devotional attitude they quickly realize the futility of their plans and return
home empty-handed. 

Lähiré Mahäçaya looks like a Bäbäjé who has already received bheka. However,
after due analysis of the Vaiñëava philosophy through his diligent absorption in
the daily Vaiñëava discussions here in Godruma, he has concluded that internal
detachment is more essential than externally donning the garb of an ascetic in
an official ceremony of bheka. The mood of Sanätana Gosvämé was to live most
frugally and Mahäçaya is trying to emulate that lofty level. For instance, to
minimize his material needs, instead of possessing four dhotis, he cuts one
dhoti into four pieces and wears one piece at a time. The sacred thread of a
brähmaëa, generally rejected by the bäbäjés, still hangs around his neck, but
when his sons attempt to offer him money he refuses, explaining, “I will not
take money from materialistic persons.” Once the elder son, Candranätha, brought
a large sum of money, offering it as a contribution for the Vaiñëava festivals.
Following in the footsteps of Çréla Raghunäthadäsa Gosvämé, Lähiré Mahäçaya
declined.

One day, Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé spoke to him, “Lähiré Mahäçaya, we see
that you have freed yourself from all the habits of the non-Vaiñëavas. Actually,
we have received bheka initiation, but from you we could still learn a great
deal about vairägya, renunciation. Now, the only thing needed to complete your
transformation is a Vaiñëava name.”

Lähiré Mahäçaya replied, “Sir, you are my parama-guru, you are free to decide as
you wish.”

Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé said, “You are from Çäntipura, so I think the name
‘Advaita däsa’ is appropriate.” Lähiré Mahäçaya fell to the ground in humility
to receive his new name. From that day on, everyone addressed him as Advaita
däsa, and even his little cottage got a new name, Advaita-kuöéra.

Advaita däsa had a friend from childhood named Digambara Caööopädhyäya, who had
accumulated great wealth by holding important posts in the Muslim government.
After retiring, he had returned to his village, Ambikä, and enquired about his
old friend, Kälidäsa Lähiré. Finally, he found out that his friend had renounced
home and family and was presently residing in Godruma under the name of Advaita
däsa, spending his days in chanting kåñëa-näma.

Digambara Caööopädhyäya was a çakta fanatic, a worshipper of çakti, the female
energy. He abhorred the word “Vaiñëavism,” covering his ears whenever it was
uttered in his hearing. Upon hearing about the present circumstances of his dear
friend, he called his servant, “Hey, Vämana däsa, immediately arrange a boat. I
want to dash off to Navadvépa without delay and save my friend Kälidäsa from
disaster!” The servant soon returned to his master with a boat fully prepared
for the journey. 

Digambara Caööopädhyäya was a shrewd man. A pundit in the tantra-çästras and
well versed in Muslim culture, he often forced the Muslim religious scholars to
accept defeat in their Persian and Arabic debates with him, and he often left
the brähmaëa paëòitas speechless whenever they tried to debate with him upon
Tantra. He was famous in important cities like Delhi and Lucknow, and in his
leisure time he had also managed to write a book entitled Tantra-saëgraha, A
Compendium of Tantra. His impressive erudition was further demonstrated by the
commentaries he had written on the various verses of this book. 

Digambara hurriedly stepped into the boat, clutching a copy of Tantra-saëgraha
in his hands. Landing at the pier of Godruma-dhäma after a two-hour boat ride,
he picked out and instructed a capable man to act as his messenger. Digambara
then dispatched the messenger to Advaita däsa and waited patiently in the boat
for his return.

Advaita däsa was sitting in his cottage and quietly chanting when Digambara’s
messenger arrived and paid his respects. Advaita däsa asked, “Who are you and
why have you come here?” The messenger replied, “I have been sent by Çré
Digambara Caööopädhyäya, who wants to know whether you, Kälidäsa Lähiré,
remember him or not?”

His curiosity aroused, Advaita däsa asked, “Where is Digambara? He is my
childhood friend, how could I ever forget him? Has he embraced Vaiñëavism?” 

The messenger replied, “He is waiting nearby in a boat, but I do not know
whether he is a Vaiñëava or not.” 

Advaita däsa quickly asked, “Why has he not come to me directly?” Upon hearing
this and without answering, the messenger took his leave to inform Digambara. 

Two hours later Digambara, accompanied by four other gentlemen, arrived at
Advaita-kuöéra. Digambara had always been very generous and open by nature and
upon seeing his old friend, he was clearly extremely pleased. He rushed to meet
Advaita däsa and taking him in his arms broke into a song he had composed: 

kälé! tomära lélä-khelä ke jäne mä, tribhuvane?
kabhu puruña, kabhu näré, kabhu matta hao go raëe

“O dear Kali, Who can fathom you, dear Mother? You enjoy pastimes on the earth
sometimes in the male form, sometimes in the female form, and sometimes you are
ferociously absorbed on the battlefield. 

brahmä ha’ye såñöi kare, såñöi näça ha’ye hara,
viñëu ha’ye viçva-vyäpé päla go mä, sarva-jane

“As Brahmä you create, as Çiva you destroy, and as Viñëu, dear Mother, you
maintain the whole universe.

kåñëa-rüpe våndävane, väàçé bäjäo vane vane,
(äbära) gaura ha’ye navadvépe, mätäo sabe saìkértane

“As Kåñëa you play the flute throughout the forests of Våndävana. Again you
appear as Gauräìga, immersing Navadvépa with the sound of saìkértana.”

Advaita däsa received him warmly, “Welcome dear brother! Come and sit down.” 

Taking a seat, Digambara reciprocated with tear-filled eyes these sentiments of
friendship and affection. He burst out saying, “Dear brother Kälidäsa, what
shall I do? You have embraced the path of renunciation and rejected the devas as
well as dharma. I have come from my life in the Punjab with great expectations.
However, back home in Çäntipura, I have found that all our childhood friends
have passed away. Remember Girish Khendä, Peçä Päglä, Içe Päglä, Dhanuva, Kele
the carpenter, and Känti Bhaööacärya? Well, all of them are gone. Just you and I
are left. I had hoped to find you in Çäntipura, thinking we could pass the rest
of our lives in the enjoyment of each other’s company. One day you would come to
my house, the next day I would cross the Gaìgä to your place; we would immerse
ourselves in music, study Tantra, and so on. However, alas! Fortune has forsaken
me, and just look at you! You are like the ox-dung, which, unlike cow-dung, can
be used neither for cleaning the house, nor in any religious ceremonies. Could
you please explain to me what you have done to yourself?”

Within himself Advaita däsa calmly considered the situation, knowing that this
was a difficult test and that he had better get away from this unwanted
association. He said, “Digambara! Do you still remember the little game we used
to play with a wooden stick and a small piece of oval-shaped wood called
gullé-daëòa? Remember one time we suddenly found ourselves under that ancient
tamarind tree?”

Digambara, “Of course I remember! It was near Gauré däsa Paëòita’s house. Gaura
and Nitäi had sat under the same tree.”

Advaita däsa, “At that time my friend you told me not to touch the tree, because
Çacémätä’s son Nimäi had sat under it, and by touching it one would become an
ascetic.”

Digambara, “I recall everything vividly. In fact, I remember your weakness for
the Vaiñëavas even at that time. I warned you then that you might fall into
Gauräìga’s trap.”

Advaita däsa, “Yes! You always knew I was inclined in that direction. Well, I
have actually fallen into the trap and now I am caught.”

Digambara, “Take hold of my hand and lift yourself out. It is never good to
remain trapped.” 

Advaita däsa, “My friend, this trap is wonderful. I pray to remain in it
forever! Why don’t you just try it for yourself?”

Digambara, “I’ve had enough experience to know that in the beginning it may seem
pleasurable, but ultimately it will give you nothing.”

Advaita däsa, “What of the net which has trapped you? Will it actually give you
happiness in the end? Don’t make that mistake.”

Digambara, “Try to understand! We tantrics are seekers of absolute knowledge,
worshipers of the Goddess Mahävidyä, Durgä-devé. This knowledge is useful now
and also later—by it we are happy now and will be so in the hereafter. You
Vaiñëavas consider yourselves happy now, but we tantrics do not consider your
renounced way of life as happiness. And in the final judgement, there will be no
end to your misery. I am confounded as to why people become Vaiñëavas. Just note
how we tantrics relish our meals of meat and fish, etc. We wear fancy clothes
and such. This is enjoyment! We are more civilized and expert in material
science, while you are denied the pleasures that these things provide, and in
the end there will be no mokña, liberation, for you.”

Advaita däsa, “Why do you say that there will be no mokña for us?”

Digambara, “If one rejects Mä Nistäriëé, the Mother of Liberation, then one
cannot be liberated—that applies to you, or even Brahmä, Viñëu, and Çiva. Mä
Nistäriëé is the ädya-çakti, original potency—she has created Brahmä, Viñëu, and
Çiva and is now maintaining them. When Mä Nistäriëé so desires everyone will
re-enter her egg-shaped womb whence all creation has emanated. Have you ever
worshiped this Mä Nistäriëé to invoke the shower of her mercy upon yourself?”

Advaita däsa, “Is Mä Nistäriëé a spiritual being or a material object?”

Digambara, “She is the personification of the conscious, spiritual energy and
independently wilful. Puruña, the spiritual Supreme Male, is created by her
wish.”

Advaita däsa, “Then, what is puruña and what is prakåti?”

Digambara, “Vaiñëavas only spend their time in bhajana; therefore, they are
bereft of philosophical knowledge. Actually, puruña and prakåti are like the two
halves of a chickpea, although they have separate identities, in fact they are
one. When the outside skin is removed, they are two, but when the skin covers
the pea, they are one. The puruña is a spiritually conscious entity, while
prakåti is inert matter. The undivided and undifferentiated condition of puruña
and prakåti is Brahman.”

Advaita däsa, “The Mä Nistäriëé you are talking about is she the female prakåti
or the male puruña?”

Digambara, “Sometimes she is puruña, and sometimes she is prakåti.”

Advaita däsa, “You said that both puruña and prakåti are like the two halves
under the skin of a chickpea. Now who of the two is the mother and who is the
father?”

Digambara, “You are challenging me with philosophical problems. Well, we know
how to tackle them. Factually, Mä Nistäriëé is prakåti and the father is
puruña.”

Advaita däsa, “Who are you, the jéva?”

Digambara, “...Päça-baddho bhavej jévaù päçu-muktaù sadäçivaù… ‘When the soul is
covered by the illusion of mäyä, he is jéva. When he is liberated from mäyä’s
influence, he is Sadäçiva.’”

Advaita däsa, “So are you puruña or prakåti?” 

Digambara, “I am puruña, and Mä Nistäriëé is prakåti. So long as I am in the
illusory, conditioned state, she is my mother. However, when I am liberated, she
becomes my wife.”

Advaita däsa, “Without doubt I have now grasped your philosophy well: You will
change from being the son of your mother to being her husband! Tell me, where
did you learn such ideas?”

Digambara, “My friend, I am not wearing blinders like you, who are only
interested in the Vaiñëavas alone. I have associated with many sannyäsés,
brahmacärés, mystic tantric yogis, and so on. In addition, I have intensively
studied the tantra-çästras before I could acquire this knowledge. If you wish, I
can school you and prepare you, too.”

Advaita däsa thought to himself, “What a terrifying idea!” However, he replied,
“Could you kindly explain your concept of civilization, and what is
präkåtika-vijïäna, material science?”

Digambara, “Civilisation means to converse well in sophisticated society, to
dress in a manner that pleases others, to eat food and conduct oneself in a way
which is not repellent to others. Actually, you Vaiñëavas follow none of these
manners.”

Advaita däsa, “How is that?”

Digambara, “You do not mingle in societies outside your own, and in general,
your behaviour is unsocial. The Vaiñëavas have not yet learnt what it means to
entertain people with sweet words. Whenever they meet someone, they directly
exhort the person to chant hari-näma. Why is this so? Are there no other
civilized topics to discuss? Your dress turns people away and so they refuse to
offer you a seat at any kind of social event. A tuff of hair tied at the crown
of the head, strings of tulasé beads hanging around the neck, dressed scantily
in a loincloth—this is the appearance. In addition, you only eat spinach and
other vegetables. The Vaiñëavas are not at all civilized.”

Advaita däsa thought to himself, “If I provoke a quarrel, he will get angry and
leave. Which would be for the better.” Continuing, Advaita däsa said, “Does
social sophistication help one’s position in the next life?”

Digambara, “I must admit that there is no gain in the next life. However, how
can society advance without culture? If society is progressing, then one can pay
attention to the next life.”

Advaita däsa, “My friend, if you promise not to become angry, I would like to
say something.”

Digambara, “You are my childhood companion, I would offer my life for you and
yet you think I cannot tolerate a few harsh words from you? We are practiced in
courtesy so even if we are irked, our words will remain sweet. After all, the
more one learns to mask one’s feelings, the more one advances in culture.”

Advaita däsa, “Human life is short and inevitably has numerous disturbances;
thus, with our limited time, it is imperative to serve the Supreme Lord, Çré
Hari, with unmotivated simplicity. The culture and sophistication, which you
present as synonyms, are merely exercises in self-deception. If a human being
remains on the path of truthfulness, his life is honest and simple. Leaving this
straight path for that of deception, he becomes sly, engages in unscrupulous
dealings, and tries to hide his crookedness behind a facade of sweet words and
postured civility. Truthfulness and simplicity are laudable human
characteristics, whereas the culture and sophistication you speak of generally
lack these qualities. True culture, in its pristine state, shorn of all
immorality, is found amongst the Vaiñëavas, and the culture of the non-Vaiñëavas
is tainted by sinful ways. Real culture means sabhyatä, worthiness to
participate in a sabhä, serious truthful assembly—in other words, simple
decency—but the contemporary definition of culture is simply a method of masking
mischievous internal motives, which are gradually further perverted into deceit.

“The so called ‘culture’ you have described has nothing in common with the
nitya-dharma of the jéva. If dressing attractively is the standard of cultured
activity, then an expensive prostitute is certainly more civilized than you.
Indeed, the real purpose of wearing clothes is simply to cover the body. The
clothes must of course be clean and fresh. Similarly, foodstuffs should be pure
and healthy. However, you insist that primarily foodstuffs should be palatable,
regardless of impurities. Alcohol and meat, for instance, are naturally impure;
therefore, to consume them is not at all cultured, but is surely a sinful act.
Today’s definition of culture is actually based on the mores of Kali-yuga.”

Digambara, “Have you completely forgotten the Badsahi culture of the Muslim
emperors? Just remember how the people would sit so gracefully in the court of
the Muslim king, dressed stylishly, and engaged in conversation according to the
court etiquette?”

Advaita däsa, “This is all mundane business. What would we lack without it? My
friend, I think that because of your long years of service amongst the Muslims
you have become biased in favour of their culture. Actually, sinless life is
truly cultured life. As I have said just now, the so-called cultural progress of
Kali-yuga only brings about an acceleration of sinful activities. It is simply
the noisome disease of hypocrisy.”

Digambara, “Just realize that today’s modern civilised man considers the
contemporary culture to be the actual height in the progress of humanity, and
that a person without such culture should hardly be considered a human being!
The present understanding of decency is that men and women should dress in
fashionable clothes and ornaments to cover their faults.”

Advaita däsa, “It is up to you to ponder over these matters and decide whether
this modern philosophy of life is actually good or bad. Personally, I notice
that modern ‘educated men’ are shrewd and sly, opportunistically observing and
taking advantage of the changing times. They favour this so-called civilization
as it provides a means to mask their ill motives and degradation. Such shrewd
men protect the so-called high pedestal of their culture with futile debates and
violent physical threat. What can an actually intelligent person gain from their
society and culture?”

Digambara, “Actually some people consider that knowledge and culture are
simultaneously expanding by this civilisation, and if the trend continues this
earth will become like heaven.”

Advaita däsa, “These are the hallucinations of opium eaters and those who
believe in such ideas are glorified fools. Yet, one who proselytises this view
is an even more amazing specimen. Knowledge is of two kinds, päramärthika,
spiritual; and laukika, material. I do not perceive anywhere that spiritual
knowledge is expanding by the progress of material knowledge. Actually, I
generally see that spiritual knowledge is being perverted and misinterpreted in
concert with the focus upon material knowledge. After all, is there actually any
eternal relationship between the jéva and material knowledge? With the
escalation of material knowledge, man’s attention has been drawn towards the
multi-fold varieties of external phenomena and distracted from the origin of all
knowledge, the transcendental Absolute Truth. I must acknowledge that the
increase of secular material knowledge is followed by a shallow ‘sophisticated’
culture. However, this is a bad omen for the jéva, leading him along the path to
spiritual self-destruction.”

Digambara, “Why a path of destruction?”

Advaita däsa, “I repeat, this human life is short. Therefore, like the wayfarer
at the inn, the jéva must diligently prepare for spiritual realization during
the travels of his limited life span. It is foolish to waste time trying to
improve arrangements at the inn during one’s short visit, without concern for
one’s destination. If more and more time is wastefully spent in the pursuit of
material knowledge, less time will be left for spiritual realization. As I see
it, we should use material knowledge to help in acquiring the basic necessities
for the maintenance of this body, while leading a simple life dedicated to
spiritual realization. There is absolutely no need of excess material knowledge
and its concomitant ‘sophisticated’ culture. Actually, what is the permanence of
all this external material gaudiness?”

Digambara, “Now I see that I have landed in the clutches of an extraordinary
person of the renounced order. Are you saying that the development of human
society is of no use?”

Advaita däsa, “That depends on the type of society. If it is a Vaiñëava society,
there is a tremendous benefit for all. That which is derived from a non-Vaiñëava
society—a materialistic society—is not at all beneficial for the jéva. However,
let us leave this topic for a moment. Tell me, what do you actually mean by
präkåtika-vijïäna?”

Digambara, “Präkåtika-vijïäna is natural material science and is found in the
tantra-çästras in many different areas. Präkåtika-vijïäna is constituted of
whatever systems, knowledge and beauty are exhibited in the material nature of
this world. For instance, there are: dhanura-vidyä, the system of military
science; ayurveda, the system of medical science; jyotira-vidyä, astrology; the
art of music and dance; and the like, which are the different branches of
präkåtika-vijïäna. 

“Coming back to philosophy, we have already discussed that prakåti is the
ädya-çakti, giving birth to and manifesting this material cosmos. Through her
own potency, she has introduced variegatedness into the creation, and in each of
the many aspects of her energy is a different area and stream of knowledge. By
acquiring this knowledge of material science, one can exonerate oneself from the
sins committed against the ädya-çakti, Mä Nistäriëé. Unfortunately, for
themselves, the Vaiñëavas do not care for or make research into vijïäna,
science. However, we Tantrics shall attain mokña through mastering this
knowledge. Just see how deeply some of the great western thinkers such as Plato,
Aristotle, Socrates and the famous Muslim scholar, Häkim, etc., have probed into
this science and even written poetic eulogies to it.”

Advaita däsa, “You just said that the Vaiñëavas do not care about vijïäna. I
disagree. The pure spiritual knowledge that the Vaiñëavas study is actual
vijïäna—extremely scientific and experiential. In one of the four catur-çloké of
the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 2.9.31, we find the following:

çré-bhagavän uväca
jïänaà parama-guhyaà me
yad vijïäna-samanvitam
sarahasyaà tad-aìgaà ca
gåhäëa gaditaà mayä

“‘O Brahmä, knowledge of Me is non-dual, and yet has four distinct divisions:
jïäna, vijïäna, rahasya, and tad-aìga. Jïäna is my svarüpa; My relationship with
My potency is vijïäna; jéva is My rahasya, secret; and pradhäna is my tad-aìga.
A jéva cannot understand this knowledge by his own intelligence, but you can
understand the same by My mercy in conjunction with devotional service. I am
explaining this science so that you may take it up carefully.’ 

“Even before the material world was created the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
being pleased by Brahmä’s devotional service, gave him this instruction. In this
way, the Lord taught Brahmä the pure and scientific vaiñëava-dharma. 

“My friend Digambara, there are two kinds of knowledge. On one hand, there is
viñaya-jïäna, material knowledge, which is acquired by human beings through the
bodily sense organs that are impure and thus unsuited to perceive spiritual
objects. These material sense organs are only of use in the maintenance the
conditioned soul’s material condition. On the other hand, there is the science
of the Supreme Self, which delves into the actual spiritual truth. This is known
as çuddha-jïana, pure spiritual knowledge, which is eternal and forms the basis
of the devotional service of the Supreme Lord performed by the Vaiñëavas. In all
respects, viñaya-jïäna is distinct and opposite from çuddha-jïana and has no
connection with it. 

“You propose that viñaya-jïäna is alone vijïäna and that the material knowledge
of ayurveda, etc., has to be separated from çuddha-jïana to attain the status of
scientific vijïäna. However, this usage of the term is incorrect because
materialistic science is not vijïäna in the true sense of the word. The truth is
that çuddha-jïana—whose characteristics are contrary to the material sciences of
Ayurveda, etc.—is actually vijïäna since çuddha-jïäna intrinsically indicates
the scientific distinction of transcendence from matter. Accurate knowledge of
the distinctive qualities inherent within an existing object is known as
vijïäna. Thus, the perfect realization of the spiritual Absolute Object as
distinct from mundane matter is actual vijïäna. Therefore, the process of
exposing and eliminating viñaya-jïäna and scientifically establishing the
pre-eminence of çuddha-jïana as distinct from viñaya-jïäna is real vijïäna. 

 “Vastu, eternal spiritual existence, is one, and both terms jïäna and vijïäna
may be applied to the perception of this transcendental existence. Jïäna is the
direct perception of transcendence, and vijïäna is the establishment of this
jïäna as distinct from viñaya-jïäna. Jïäna and vijïäna are actually the same
thing; however, according to the particular context the term jïäna or vijïäna is
used. 

“You claim that vijïäna indicates viñaya-jïäna; however, the Vaiñëavas say that
actual vijïäna gives the true analysis of viñaya-jïäna as distinct from
çuddha-jïäna. The Vaiñëavas consider dhanura-veda, ayurveda, jyotira-veda, and
chemistry, physics, etc., as material knowledge without a permanent relationship
to the jéva. Therefore, such material knowledge is inconsequential in terms of
establishing the jéva in one of the five rasas in relationship to Éçvara, which
are the ultimate nitya-dharma of the jévas. Further, the Vaiñëavas see that
those who are ardently striving to advance in viñaya-jïäna according to their
individual material propensities are absorbed in the activities of karma-käëòa. 

“However, Vaiñëavas do not criticize those who endeavour for progress in
understanding the mundane nature because this activity may ultimately come to
assist them in understanding the prime efficacy of spiritual realization. You
have misnamed the insignificant mundane knowledge of the materialists as
vijïäna. Well, ultimately, what harm can the erroneous adoption of that name do?
It is childish to quarrel insistently over names and designations.”

Digambara, “Supposing material knowledge had not advanced to what it is today,
how would you subsist and perform your bhajana? This indicates that you
Vaiñëavas must also work to improve your material knowledge.”

Advaita däsa, “Persons endeavour in their chosen field according to their
individual propensities. However, Éçvara alone distributes the appropriate
results of those actions to their performers.”

Digambara, “From where do the individual inclinations and propensities arise?”

Advaita däsa, “Habits and preferences forged from previous actions will
consolidate later into one’s propensities. The depth of a person’s material
knowledge is the barometer that measures the extent of his material engrossment.
In turn, this material knowledge and engrossment makes him an expert in
expressing the mundane art forms, which are also an outcome of material culture.
Ultimately, however, whatever articles are suitable—as a result of this entire
material endeavour by the materially engrossed—will be utilized gratefully by
the Vaiñëavas as paraphernalia for the devotional service of the Lord. However,
the Vaiñëavas themselves need not invest any energy in the creation of these
products. 

“A carpenter makes furniture for a living. However, he can also make an altar to
enthrone the Deity in home of a gåhastha-vaiñëava. Following their instinct and
propensity, the bees busily collect pollen and produce honey, which is then
taken away to be offered to the Lord. Not everyone in this world will endeavour
for their own highest good—spiritual elevation. The different activities are
prompted by different propensities. 

“Human propensities are numerous—they are high or low, and so on. Degraded
persons perform many base activities resulting from mean propensities. However,
at the same time, they may perform activities prompted by co-existing noble
propensities. Thus, the wheel of human life turns, combining in itself
innumerable divisions and departments. All materialistic men, executing their
works inspired by their mundane propensities, reach success by indirectly
assisting the Vaiñëavas in their spiritual practice. The materialists are,
however, unaware of this fact. Bewitched by Çré Viñëu’s illusory potency, Mäyä,
they perform multifarious mundane activities, which are later utilized by the
Vaiñëavas in the devotional service of the Lord. In this way the entire world is
actually the unwitting servitor of the Vaiñëavas.”

Digambara, “What is this Mäyä of Çré Viñëu?”

Advaita däsa, “In the Märkaëòeya Puräëa, Caëòé-mähätmya, 81.40, mäyä is
described with these words: 

yogamäyä hareù çaktir yayä sammohitaà jagat 

“‘Yogamäyä is the potency of Çré Viñëu by which the whole world is bewildered.’ 

Digambara, “Who is that personality known as Mä Nistäriëé?”

Advaita däsa, “She is this Mäyä of Çré Viñëu, also known as Viñëu-mäyä.”

At this point, Digambara opened his hand-written manuscript on Tantra and said,
“Here, read! My Mä Nistäriëé is addressed as Caitanya-rüpiëé, embodying
spiritual consciousness; Icchämäyé, fully independent; Triguëatita,
transcendental to the material modes; and Triguëa-dhäriëé, the controller of the
material modes. The one you call Viñëu-mäyä, is not beyond the scope of the
three material modes of nature. Then how can you equate her with my Mä Nistäriëé
who is so transcendentally described? I can see plainly that you Vaiñëavas are
fanatical in terms of this topic and I strongly detest it.”

Advaita däsa, “My dear brother, Digambara! Please do not get upset. As you have
come to see me and we are meeting after a long separation, I would like you to
be content and happy. Why do you surmise that the name ‘Viñëu-mäyä’ is demeaning
in some way? Çré Viñëu is the embodiment of the absolute spiritual
consciousness; He is the Supreme Lord of all Lords and everything is His
energy—His Mäyä. Energy is not an independently existing entity; it is the
inherent characteristic of an object. Therefore, it is a philosophical error to
describe energy as the source and fountainhead of everything, for energy cannot
exist without a source. Therefore, first, an absolute spiritual subject has to
be established.

“In the Vedänta commentaries, we find: …çakti-çaktimatayor abhedaù… ‘The potency
and the potent are one.’ Energy is not an independent entity, rather the
Çaktimän-puruña, the Supreme Being, is the possessor and source of all energy.
Mäyä is His intrinsic nature and subservient to His desires as the
Çaktimän-puruña. Therefore, it is not fallacious to describe Mäya as
Caitanya-rüpéëi, Icchämäyé, or Triguëatita, because Mäyä manifests and acts
under the orders of the transcendental Çaktimän-puruña. In this way, she is
non-different from the Çaktimän-puruña.

“Icchä, desire, and caitanya, consciousness, are attributes of the
Çaktimän-puruña. Çakti, or Mäyä, does not possess independent icchä, she works
under the direction and will of the Çaktimän-puruña. For example, a person is
endowed with the çakti, energy, to walk and move about. However, this çakti is
only set in motion if the person desires to do so. Thus, it is only a figure of
speech to say, ‘Çakti walks.’ What is actually meant is that the possessor of
çakti—the puruña—is walking. Similarly, Bhagavän is the controller and possessor
of His singular energy, Çakti. However, that singular energy manifests in
unlimited variety. In transcendental spiritual activities, she is known as the
cit-çakti and in material affairs as the acit-çakti, or Mäyä. In the Vedas,
Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad, 6.8, we find:

paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate 

“‘The absolute energies of the Supreme Brahman are multifarious in nature.’ 

“Triguëa-dhäriëé Çakti, whom you have just referred to, is actually mundane
energy. Material creation and annihilation are part of her activities. The
puräëas and tantras define this energy as Viñëu-mäyä, Mahä-mäyä, Mäyä, etc.
Allegorically, she is said to be the mother of the trinity—Brahma, Viñëu and
Maheçvara. Also, she slays the fearsome demons, Çumbha and Niçumbha, and
performs many other similarly wonderful activities as recorded in the
scriptures. 

“The jévas are forced to remain her captives as long as they are engrossed in
matter. Nevertheless, when they are enlightened with the transcendental
knowledge of their true spiritual identities, they sever the shackles of Maya
and win freedom. If one submits to the Lord’s transcendental cit-çakti, one will
eternally experience supramundane ecstasy.”

Digambara, “Are you, or are you not, under a particular energy?”

Advaita däsa, “Yes, we are jéva-çakti. We have escaped from the influence of the
illusory material mäyä-çakti and taken shelter under the control of the
transcendental absolute cit-çakti.”

Digambara, “That makes you çaktas, the worshippers of çakti, too.”

Advaita däsa, “Yes, of course, Vaiñëavas are the real çaktas. We are under the
patronage of Çré Rädhikä, the embodiment of the cit-çakti. We worship Kåñëa, but
under Çré Rädhikä’s loving guardianship. Hence, who can claim to be more
authentic çaktas than us? We do not see any differences between a true çakta and
a Vaiñëava. However, those who worship only the mäyä-çakti without taking
complete shelter within the spiritual cit-çakti are admittedly to some extent
çaktas, but cannot be considered Vaiñëavas. Ultimately, they are gross
materialists. Durgädevé has made the following statement as recorded in the
Närada-Païcarätra:

tava vakñasi rädhä’ham rae våndävane

“‘In my original form as cit-svarüpa, the embodiment of the spiritual potency,
I, as Çré Rädhikä—the antaraìga-çakti, the internal energy—reside in the forests
of Våndävana-dhäma, embellishing Your [Kåñëa’s] divine bosom.’

“Unequivocally, the words of Durgä-devé proclaim that çakti is a singular energy
and potency, not a plurality. There is an ultimate unity between Her original
form as the cit-svarüpa, Çré Rädhikä, and Her mundane form, the çakti-mäyä
jaòa-svarüpa, the embodiment of the material energy. Thus, in Her pure state,
bereft of the three material modes, Viñëu-mäyä is the cit-çakti and in Her
mundane condition, when She is in touch with the three material modes, She is
the jaòa-çakti, material energy.”

Digambara, “You mentioned earlier that we are jéva-çakti, please explain.”

Advaita däsa, “The Supreme Lord says in the Bhagavad-gétä 7.4-5:

bhümir äpo ’nalo väyuù
khaà mano buddhir eva ca
ahaìkära itéyaà me
bhinnä prakåtir añöadhä

apareyam itas tv anyäà
prakåtià viddhi me paräm
jéva-bhütäà mahä-bäho
yayedaà dhäryate jagat

“‘Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all together
these eight comprise My separated material energies. Yet, besides this inferior
nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior energy of Mine, which
comprises all living entities who are struggling with the material nature and
are sustaining the universe.’ 

“Digambara, do you know the glorious position of the Bhagavad-gétä? It is the
essence of all scriptures and offers the conclusion to every debate. Thus, we
can conclude from this statement that besides this jaòa-çakti there is the
existence of the jéva, which is different in constitution. The jéva-çakti is
another of the Supreme Lord’s energies—superior to the material energy and yet
inferior to the cit-çakti—known by the sages as the taöasthä-çakti, the marginal
potency. Hence, the living entity is a unique form of the çakti of Çré Kåñëa.”

Digambara, “Kälidäsa, have you ever read the Bhagavad-gétä?”

Advaita däsa, “Yes, in fact, I read it long ago.”

Digambara, “What is the standard of its philosophical truth?”

Advaita däsa, “My dear brother, a person endlessly praises the sweet taste of
molasses only so long as he has not tasted pure crystal sugar.”

Digambara, “Look, I think this is bias on your part. Devé Bhägavata and
Devé-gétä are appreciated throughout the world. However, you and your Vaiñëava
associates do not even like to hear the mention of these two books.”

Advaita däsa, “Have you read the Devé-gétä?”

Digambara, “There is no reason for me to lie—I have not read it. For some time I
have tried to obtain a copy of both books, but have as of yet failed to procure
them.”

Advaita däsa, “How can you comment upon a book that you have not yet read? Tell
me, who is biased, you or me?”

Digambara, “I must admit that even since childhood I was always a bit afraid of
you. You were, even in those early days, a voluble person and now after becoming
a Vaiñëava you seem to have honed your wit to even greater sharpness. You
strongly refute whatever I say.”

Advaita däsa, “Honestly speaking, I am a wretched fool, but after proper
research, I have concluded that there are no pure religious ethics outside the
vaiñëava-dharma. However, you have opposed vaiñëava-dharma during your whole
life and have thus brought ill fortune upon yourself.”

Digambara, now getting slightly angry, retorted, “O yes! You can say that! I am
deeply involved in religious worship and discipline and you claim that I have
been wasting my time? Here, look! This book Tantra-saëgraha is a result of my
hard labour. You blindly denounce culture and science and try to boast about
your Vaiñëava philosophy and practice, but what am I supposed to do about that?
Come, let us continue this debate before an assembly of the learned and
cultured, and then see who is said to have the superior conclusion, you or me?”

Advaita däsa was now thinking that it was rather a better idea to rid himself of
this bad company and said, “After all, tell me, what will your culture and
material science do for you when you die?”

Digambara, “Kälidäsa, shame on you! Is there anything after death? As long as
one lives, one should try to be acknowledged by the cultured society and enjoy
one’s senses as much as possible. In the end, when death approaches, Mä
Nistäriëé will place you in an appropriate situation. Should we tolerate the
present distress only because death is imminent? Where will you be when the body
made up of five elements dissolves into the five great elements of material
nature? This material existence is Mäyä, both Mahä-mäyä and Yogamäyä. Only she
can offer you pleasures in the present and certain liberation after death. 

“Çakti is the ultimate, there is nothing beyond her. You are born through Çakti
and you will return to Çakti. One must begin by serving Çakti. Behold the power
of Çakti in material science! Diligently improve your yogic strength because by
that you will see there is nothing but the unmanifest Çakti. Whence did you
manufacture the phantasmagoria about this conscious Supreme Controller known as
Éçvara? By believing in these stories, you are forced to experience hardships in
the present. And who can guarantee that you will gain more than us after death?
What business do you have with a divine male factor, a Puruña? Simply surrender
to Çakti, you can merge into her, and thus eternally exist in her.”

Advaita däsa, “Dear friend, I see that you are captivated by the material
energy. Moreover, suppose the Caitanya-puruña actually exists, then what will
your future be after a lifetime of ignoring Him? In addition, kindly consider
what is the actual happiness of this present life? I would say that satisfaction
and peace of mind are real happiness. Yes, I have rejected all material
pleasures, but now I experience a real inner happiness. And if there is
eternality beyond this life, then by His grace I shall have that also. On the
other hand, you are not at all peaceful and contented even presently. The more
you seek carnal pleasures, the more your thirst for them increases. You have
never really understood what real happiness actually is. Chasing after the
pleasures of the flesh, one day you will certainly plunge deeply into an ocean
of grief.”

Digambara, “We shall see what happens to me, but first tell me why you have left
the sophisticated cultured milieu?”

Advaita däsa, “I have not discarded the cultured society, in fact that is what I
have actually gained, and now I am busy avoiding the uncultured lot.”

Digambara, “What do you understand by uncultured?”

Advaita däsa, “Please do not get angry, listen to what Çrémad Bhägavatam,
4.30.33, states, which is quoted in the Hari-bhakti-viläsa, 10.292:

yävat te mäyayä spåñöä
bhramäma iha karmabhiù
tävad bhavat-prasaìgänäà
saìgaù syän no bhave bhave

“‘Dear Lord, as long as we have to remain within this material world as a result
of our material contamination and wander from one type of body to another and
from one planet to another, we pray that we may associate with those who are
engaged in discussing Your pastimes. We pray for this benediction life after
life, in different bodily forms and on different planets.’

“In the Hari-bhakti-viläsa, 10.294, it is said:

asadbhiù saha saìgas tu 
na kartavyaù kadäcana
yasmät sarvärtha-häniù syäd 
adhaù-pätaç ca jäyate

“‘One should never associate with people who are absorbed in non-reality, for by
such company one is deprived of all worthwhile objects of attainment and falls
down to a degraded position.’

“The sage Kätyäyana recorded in his Kätyäyana-saàhitä, which is quoted in the
Hari-bhakti-viläsa, 10.295:

varaà hutavaha-jvälä 
païjaräntar-vyavasthitiù
na çauri-cintä-vimukha
jana-samväsa-vaiçasam

“‘Better I burn in a blazing fire or remain forever caged, rather than
experience the pain of having association with a person who is inimical to Kåñëa
consciousness.’

“Further, the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 3.31.33-34, declares, as quoted in the
Hari-bhakti-viläsa, 10.297-298:

satyaà çaucaà dayä maunaà
buddhiù çrér hrér yaçaù kñamä
çamo damo bhagaç ceti
yat-saìgäd yäti saìkñayam

“‘One becomes devoid of truthfulness, cleanliness, mercy, gravity, spiritual
intelligence, shyness, austerity, fame, forgiveness, control of the mind,
control of the senses, fortune, and all such opportunities.’

teñv açänteñu müòheñu
khaëòitätmasv asädhuñu
saìgaà na kuryäc chocyeñu
yoñit-kréòä-mågeñu ca

“‘Therefore, one should not associate with a coarse fool who is bereft of the
knowledge of self-realization and who is no more than a dancing dog in the hands
of a woman.’

“In the Garuda Puräëa, purva 231.13, we find:

päraà gato ’pi vedänäà
sarva-çästrärtha-vedy api
yo na sarveçvare bhaktas
taà vidyät puruñädhamam

“‘Even though one may have gone to the other side of all the Vedas, and even
though one is well versed in all the revealed scriptures, if one is not a
devotee of the Supreme Lord, one must be considered amongst the lowest of
mankind.’

“In the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 6.1.18:

präyaçcittäni cérëäni
näräyaëa-paräìmukham
na niñpunanti räjendra
surä-kumbham iväpagäù

“‘My dear King, as a pot containing liquor cannot be purified even if washed in
the waters of many rivers, non-devotees cannot be purified by processes of
atonement even if they perform them very well, again and again.’

“Further, in the Skanda Puräëa, as quoted in Hari-bhakti-viläsa, 10.312, we see:

hanti nindati vai dveñöi 
vaiñëavän näbhinandati
krudhyate yäti no harñaà 
darçane patanäni ñaö

“‘The six causes of degradation and fall-down are to strike a Vaiñëava, to
criticize him, to hate him, to not welcome or greet him upon sight, to show
anger to him, and not to be happy upon seeing him.’

“You see, Digambara, it is most inauspicious for the jéva to associate with such
spiritually destitute persons. What can be the benefit of living in the society
of such despicable company?”

Digambara, “Imagine, we came to meet you as a decent gentleman! However,
according to you we have become a coarse and uncouth cripple! Just as well!
Kindly stay here and associate with your ‘pure’ Vaiñëavas, I am returning to my
home.”

Advaita däsa could see that the exchange was concluding and thought it best to
finish with some kind parting words. He said, “You must go home, but you are my
childhood friend, seen again after such a long time. I do not feel like letting
you go. You have so kindly come to see me; will you not stay a little longer and
take prasädam with us?”

Digambara, “Brother Kälidäsa, you know that I cannot digest any outside food,
besides I eat only haviñya, sacrificial food, and I have already taken before I
came here. Indeed, I was very glad to see you and will come again when I have
some leisure time. I cannot spend the night here because I must perform certain
disciplines, handed down to me by my guru. So I will take my leave now.”

Advaita däsa, “Come, I will accompany you to your boat.”

Digambara, “No, no, it’s all right. Continue with your work. I have a few
persons along with me.”

With these parting words, Digambara walked quickly away, humming to himself a
song about Kälé-mä. Advaita däsa quietly went back to his kuöéra. He sat down
peacefully and began to chant kåñëa-näma.

Thus ends the ninth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma and Material
Science and Civilization

JDH 10: The Age and History of Nitya-dharma

Chapter Ten
The Age and History of Nitya-dharma

Çré Harihara Bhaööäcärya of Agradvépa, by profession a teacher, some time back
had been suddenly assailed by a nagging doubt, which had persisted even after he
had approached and discussed with many persons, so the frustration he felt in
his heart had grown considerably. Finally, he came to the village of Arkaöélä
and questioned the learned scholar of logic, Çré Caturbhuja Nyäyaratna. “Dear
Bhaööäcärya Mahäçaya, please could you kindly tell me the age of
vaiñëava-dharma?”

Çré Harihara Bhaööäcärya had been initiated into the Vaiñëava order and daily
had worshiped Kåñëa in his home. Whereas Çré Caturbhuja had been assiduously
studying the nyäya-çästra of logic and philosophy for twenty years. At the end
of all this study, he had developed an attitude of aloofness towards dharma.
Apathetic to religious wranglings and debates, only during his çakti worship did
he sometimes show signs of bhakti. Therefore, his first reaction to Harihara’s
question was the thought, “Harihara is already partial to vaiñëava-dharma, now
he wants to drag me into a philosophical labyrinth. It is better to avoid this
argument.”

Therefore he said, “Dear Harihara, your question surprises me. You have already
studied up to the level of the muktipäda section of the nyäya-çästra, so you
should be well aware that in the rhetoric of the nyäya scriptures the
vaiñëava-dharma is never mentioned. So, I ask you: Why do you harass me with
your question?”

Harihara said, “Sir, I have received vaiñëava-mantra dékçä in accordance with
the age-old traditions of our family. Never, have I had any doubts about
vaiñëava-dharma, but recently I heard that the famous debater from Vikramapura,
Çré Tarka-cüòämaëi, has apparently set out on a mission to uproot
vaiñëava-dharma. He travels extensively and preaches strongly against the
Vaiñëava ethics, filling his coffers along the way. In one such gathering,
predominantly visited by a çakta audience, he remarked that vaiñëava-dharma was
very new and also lacking in philosophical depth, and that only people from the
lower castes become Vaiñëavas, the high-class gentry turning up their noses and
looking down on vaiñëava-dharma. 

“Initially upset to hear a scholar of his stature uttering such banalities, I
pondered nevertheless over what he had said and came to certain realizations.
Before the advent of Çré Caitanya, vaiñëava-dharma had never been practiced in
Bengal to any great extent. The majority of the people were followers of the
çakti cult. Although a few persons like me also took initiation into
vaiñëava-mantra, still, of this few most aspired after Brahman realization and
were engaged in attaining mokña. The çakti worshippers, also known as
païcopäsaka, the worshipers of the five Deities, mostly adopted this standard of
vaiñëava-dharma. 

“The vaiñëava-dharma has definitely undergone changes and taken a new form since
the appearance of Çré Caitanya. The Vaiñëavas now close their mind and ears to
words and thoughts like Brahman and mukti. Now, I cannot even fathom the
structure of the philosophy of bhakti. These modern Vaiñëavas prove the proverb
that the blind have to find another support for they rarely stay on the right
path. Thus, I have come to you with my question: Has the vaiñëava-dharma that we
find today existed since the dawn of civilization, or did it arise after the
advent of Çré Caitanya?”

Upon realizing that Harihara’s standpoint was not that of a fanatic Vaiñëava,
the face of Çré Caturbhuja immediately lit up. He said, “Harihara, I support
your views. The present rise of this fledgling vaiñëava-dharma is intimidating
and one cannot even speak out against it openly. Remember, this is Kali-yuga,
one must be very cautious. Many rich gentlemen have been highly influenced by
the philosophy of Caitanya and have joined His ranks. They disrespect us greatly
and even consider us as their enemies. I dare say they will soon eliminate us.
Traders and members of other business communities have started to hold
dissertations and discussions upon the scriptures, certainly a cause of
consternation for the brähmaëa caste. 

“Mind you, for a long time we brähmaëas had expertly arranged society so that we
were exclusively favoured in the study and teaching of the çästras and every
other caste was barred from such practice. Even the caste just below us, the
käyasthas, was afraid to chant the Vedic mantras—even beginning with the primal
sound, auà. Everyone was simply accepting our authority and following our
instructions. However, now many people are converting to vaiñëava-dharma, and
furthermore, even as such neophytes they are debating and analysing philosophy.
Indeed, ever since Nimäi Paëòita entered the scene, our image and position have
been tarnished and the brahminical religion has gradually become obsolete. My
dear Harihara, the paëòita you have just mentioned, Tarka-cüòämaëi, has
definitely said the right thing, whether out of greed for money or for whatever
other reason. 

“These rascal Vaiñëavas! Their words really irk me. They are now propagating
this garbage that Çaìkaräcärya—on the Supreme Lord’s direct orders—compiled the
mäyäväda literature, which according to them is a totally false concept. They,
on the other hand, say that the vaiñëava-dharma is eternal and has existed since
time immemorial. Not even a century has gone by since this dharma took birth and
now, suddenly, it is said to be without a beginning! What is that old saying?
…‘The shoe is now on the wrong foot.’ 

“Well, let them scream as much as they want. Regrettably, however, Navadvépa is
now not such a nice place as it was. It has certainly deteriorated, especially
in the area of Gädigächä. Some Vaiñëavas are living there and they act as if the
world belonged to them. A few of them are very learned scholars and their
preaching is causing chaos amongst the common folk. They are destroying our land
and discouraging people from believing in the eternal mäyävädé philosophy and
the worship of devas and devés, demigoddesses. Soon this religious culture and
practice will disappear. Have you not seen the definite decline in the elaborate
performance of çräddha, oblations to departed souls, and other brahminical
observances? How will the officiating priests maintain their families without
the income from these observances?”

Harihara replied, “Well, mahätmäjé! Is there no solution or reprisal for this
situation? There are still a few famous learned paëòitas in Mäyäpura. In
addition, across the Gaìgä in Kuliyä village there are several scholars of småti
and nyäya. What about if we were to band together and collectively lay siege
upon the Vaiñëavas of Gädigächä?”

Reflecting upon this, Nyäyaratna thought out loud, “Yes that is possible, yet
only if there is unity amongst us. In general, we are divided and distrust one
another considerably. Recently, I heard that a small group of brähmaëas took
Kåñëa Cüòämaëi to Gädigächä and challenged the Vaiñëavas to a philosophical
debate. They were vanquished and returned to their individual toläs, private
Sanskrit schools, inventing stories to tell the people in order to save their
reputations.”

Harihara said, “Respected Bhaööäcärya Mahäçaya, you are our teacher and an
instructor of numerous other teachers. Many people have learned the art of
rhetoric and argumentation from reading your commentaries on nyäya. You must go
and once and for all defeat those Vaiñëava paëòitas. Prove to them that their
vaiñëava-dharma is just a new fashion and lacks Vedic authorization. Only then
will our flag of païcopäsanä, which has received widespread patronage for such a
long time, keep on waving proudly.”

Externally, Çré Caturbhuja Nyäyaratna did not display the nagging fear in his
mind, namely that perhaps a place where Kåñëa Cüòämaëi and others had been
humbled might also become his own place of devastation. He said, “Harihara, I
will go disguised and you will taken the position of being a leading teacher.
You will start the debate and set the assembly ablaze with blistering arguments,
then I shall take over.” 

Harihara, bristling with confidence, exulted, “I am fully prepared to follow
your instructions. Next Monday, we will cross the Gaìgä in the name of Mahädeva
and lay siege there in Gädigächä.”

The days passed by until that fateful Monday arrived. Harihara, Kamaläkänta, and
Sadäçiva—a trio of brähmaëa teachers—collected Çré Caturbhuja from his home in
Arkaöélä and crossed the Gaìgä. It was three-thirty when they stomped into
Pradyumna-kuïja grove, much like the famed Durväsä Muni and his followers, and
seating themselves on the Çré Mädhavé-mälaté Maëòapa platform, announced their
arrival by loudly uttering, “Haribol! Haribol!” Advaita däsa Bäbäjé quietly
appeared, welcomed them graciously, and seated them upon comfortable straw mats.
He enquired, “Kindly, How may we help you?”

Haridäsa spoke up, saying, “We have come to discuss certain subjects with the
Vaiñëavas.”

Advaita däsa Bäbäjé quickly said, “The Vaiñëavas here shy away from arguments,
but if you have sincere queries that would be nice. The other day a few scholars
came pretending to be genuine seekers, but only bombarded us with a barrage of
verbiage. In the end, they had to retreat, crest-fallen and nursing their
battered pride. Therefore, let me ask the permission of Çré Paramahaàsa
Premadäsa Bäbäjé.” He disappeared into the cottage of Paramahaàsa Premadäsa
Bäbäjé Mahäräja.

Shortly afterwards, Advaita däsa Bäbäjé returned and went around spreading more
sitting mats. Soon, Çré Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé arrived, offered his
prostrated obeisances first to the tulasé plant, then to the visitors, and
finally took a seat. Hands folded, he asked his guests, “Kindly say, how may we
serve you?”

Paëòita Caturbhuja said, “We have a couple of questions we would like to have
answered.” Immediately, Çré Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé called for Vaiñëava
däsa Bäbäjé. The latter came and taking stock of the situation sat down quietly.


When everyone was properly settled, Caturbhuja asked, “Is the vaiñëava-dharma
modern, or is it primordial?”

Çré Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé’s imperceptible, urging nod gave Vaiñëava däsa
Bäbäjé the signal, so he said, “The all-auspicious vaiñëava-dharma is sanätana,
ever-existent, and nitya, eternal.”

Caturbhuja Nyäyaratna, “I see that the vaiñëava-dharma is of two kinds. One kind
professes that Brahman, the Supreme Truth, is niräkära, formless. However, as
the niräkära cannot be worshiped therefore an imaginary form is constructed, and
by worship of this imaginary form the consciousness is purified. The mythical
image of Rädhä and Kåñëa, of Räma, or Nåsiàha, is worshipped and thereby one
gradually becomes enlightened with the knowledge of niräkära-brahman, the
formless Supreme. When one’s consciousness is thus purified, then the impersonal
nature of Brahman is realized. Amongst the païcopäsanäs, those who worship the
mürti of Viñëu and meditate on a specific viñëu-mantra with this understanding
introduce themselves as Vaiñëavas. 

“The other kind of vaiñëava-dharma asserts that Viñëu, Kåñëa, Räma, and so on,
possess eternal personal forms. According to this understanding, worship and
meditation upon the individual mantras and çré-mürtis of their Lordships leads
to absolute, eternal knowledge and the acquisition of divine mercy by the
sädhaka, practitioner. In this view, the philosophy of impersonalism is called
mäyäväda and is considered an illusory misconception distributed by the
propounder of impersonalism, Çré Çaìkaräcärya. Which of these two is the
sanätana and nitya vaiñëava-dharma?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “The latter is the real vaiñëava-dharma, and it is
certainly sanätana. The former kind you spoke of is vaiñëava-dharma in name
only; in actual reality, it is the opposite of the true vaiñëava-dharma. It is a
non-permanent philosophy, borrowing greatly from the monistic concepts of the
mäyäväda school.”

Caturbhuja, “Everything is now quite clear to me. You say that the real
vaiñëava-dharma is the philosophy of Çré Caitanya deva, and that the real and
true vaiñëava-dharma does not simply consist of worshiping Çré Çré Rädhä Kåñëa,
or Çré Räma, or Çré Nåsiàha, and so on, but insist that this vaiñëava-dharma has
to be performed as prescribed by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. All right, but how can
you claim that this brand of vaiñëava-dharma is sanätana, given that Çré
Caitanya appeared only recently?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Actually vaiñëava-dharma has existed since the creation
of the jéva. The jévas are designated as anädi, beginningless, having not come
into being within the purview of mundane history and creation—their
manifestation is from the Supreme Lord and thus above the linear strictures of
material time. Thus, it is fair to conclude that the intrinsic constitutional
function of the jéva known as jaiva-dharma—or vaiñëava-dharma—is also
beginningless, primordial, and eternal.

“Within the material universe, Lord Brahmä is the first manifested jéva. As soon
as Lord Brahmä appears, the first Vedic hymns of knowledge, the basis of
vaiñëava-dharma, also become manifest. This momentous occurrence is recorded in
the famous four essential verses of the Çrémad Bhägavatam known as the
catuù-çloké. 

“In addition, this is corroborated in the Muëòaka Upaniñad, 1.1.1:

brahmä devänäà prathamaù sambabhüva
viçvasya kartä bhuvanasya goptä
sa brahma-vidyäà sarva-vidyä-pratiñöhäm
atharväya jyeñöha-puträya präha

“‘Lord Brahmä, the creator and protector of this universe, appeared prior to any
other creature, from the lotus sprouting from the navel of Supreme Lord. He
initiated his eldest son, Atharvä, into the science of the Absolute Truth known
as parama-vidyä, which is the repository of all branches of knowledge.’

“The Åg Veda Saàhitä, 1.22.20, states:

tad viñëoù paramaà padaà
sadä paçyanti sürayaù
divéva cakçur ätatam

“‘The supreme destination, the spiritual abode of Çré Viñëu, is resplendently
self-manifest as brightly as the sun. It is seen and worshiped since time
immemorial by the devas and Vaiñëava saints.’

“In addition, the Kaöhopaniñad, 1.3.9, declares:

tad viñëoù paramaà padam
visëor yat paramaà padam

“‘The lotus feet of Çré Viñëu are the ultimate and greatest shelter.’

“Further, in the Svetäçvatara Upaniñad, 5.4, the following is found: 

sarvä-diça ürddhvam adhaç ca tiryak
prakäçayan bhräjate yad vanaòvän
evaà sa devo bhagavän vareëyo
yoni-svabhävän adhitiñöhaty ekaù

“‘There is but one Supreme Lord, the Absolute Godhead, who is the primal cause
of all causes. Like the sun that disperses brilliant rays to drive away the
darkness, but ever remains so resplendent, the Supreme Godhead also maintains
His supreme divinity in all circumstances.’

“The Taittiréya Upaniñad, 2.1.2, states:

satyaà jïänam anantaà brahma
yo veda nihitaà guhäyäà parame vyoman
so ‘çnute sarvän kämän saha brahmaëä vipaçcitä

“‘The Supreme Absolute Brahman is the embodiment of truth, knowledge and
eternity. He is transcendental to the purview of material time, place and
senses. One who has realized that the Supreme Brahman is simultaneously situated
both in the spiritual sky and in the hearts of the jévas becomes sublimely
connected with this omniscient Çré Hari in a loving relationship, which
completely fulfils all the spiritual desires of the jéva.’

“This devotional mood of eternal surrender is totally absent in the
pseudo-Vaiñëavism, which is the result of the influence of the mäyäväda
philosophy. In terms of attaining knowledge, by this pseudo-Vaiñëava philosophy
one cannot become enlightened about one’s true spiritual identity as an eternal
servant of the Supreme Lord, because this philosophy proposes that when one
attains knowledge of Brahman one becomes Brahman. If one considers oneself
Brahman, why should one serve Brahman? 

“In contrast, the Kaöhopaniñad, 1.2.23, instructs:

näyam ätmä pravacanena labhyo
na medhayä na bahunä çrutena
yam evaiña våëute tena labhyas
tasyaiña ätmä vivåëute tanuà sväm

“‘The knowledge of the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Supersoul, cannot be acquired
through endless debates, sharp intellect, or erudition. However, when the jéva
soul turns to the Supreme Lord Çré Hari in a serving mood and begs for His
mercy, the Lord within the heart reciprocates and reveals Himself to the jéva.’

“Factually, the process of devotional surrender is the only true dharma. When
the Supreme Brahman, Bhagavän, is satisfied and showers His mercy upon the
devotee, the eternal transcendental form of the Supreme Lord can be directly
seen. Knowledge of just the impersonal aspect, Brahman, cannot bestow perception
of this divine transcendental form. These unequivocal declarations from the
Vedas establish the pure vaiñëava-dharma. Thus, the brand of vaiñëava-dharma
propagated by Çré Caitanya is fully supported by the entire Vedic literature.
There can be no doubt regarding this.”

Caturbhuja, “Are there any references in the Vedic scriptures to show that the
essence and ultimate goal of dharma is çuddha-bhakti to Çré Kåñëa and not the
attainment of Brahman?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “The Taittiréya Upaniñad, 2.7.1, states: 

raso vai saù 

“‘That Supreme Absolute Truth is the embodiment of all spiritual relationships.’


“Additionally, in the Chändogya Upaniñad, 8.13.1, we find the statement: 

çyämäc chabalaà prapadye 
çabaläc chyämaà prapadye 

“‘The multifarious energies of the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa are known as çabala.
Through the process of surrendering to Çré Kåñëa, we find the shelter of the
hlädiné-çakti, the pleasure potency of the Lord, which is the quintessence of
all His energies. In the divine sanctuary of this hlädiné-çakti, we attain
çuddha-bhakti to Çré Kåñëa, Çyämasundara.’

“Thus, there are numerous Vedic statements proving that çuddha-bhakti to Çré
Kåñëa is the ultimate aim of dharma.”

Caturbhuja, “Is the name of Çré Kåñëa mentioned anywhere in the Vedas?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Does not the above word, çyäma, directly imply Kåñëa?
Also, the Åg Veda, 1.22.164.31, relates: 

apaçyaà gopäm anipadyamänamä 

“‘I saw a cowherd-boy Gopäla, Kåñëa, who is infallible.’ 

“These descriptions in the Vedas refer to the young boy, Gopäla Kåñëa.”

Caturbhuja, “All these descriptions are allusions and one has to stretch the
meanings to arrive at such a conclusion.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “If you scrutinize the Vedic scripture you will discover
that Vedic statements on all matters are written in this cryptic strain.
Therefore, we should accept the purports on the Vedas given to us by the sages.”

Caturbhuja, “Now please tell me the history of the vaiñëava-dharma.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “I have already mentioned that vaiñëava-dharma is
concomitant with the manifestation of the jéva. Lord Brahmä is the first
Vaiñëava. All the devas and early progenitors are Vaiñëavas. The mental progeny
of Lord Brahmä, Närada Åñi, is also a Vaiñëava. Have you understood now that the
vaiñëava-dharma has existed since the creation? All jévas are not beyond the
influence of the mäyä-çakti in her form as the three modes of material nature;
yet to the degree they are freed from the mäyä-çakti they are also advanced in
vaiñëava-dharma.

“The Mahäbhärata, Ramayana, and the Puräëas are scriptures detailing the history
of the Äryans. The superiority of the vaiñëava-dharma is described in all these
scriptures, which are historical texts and records centred on famous
personalities. In these descriptions of the devas, humans, and demons, we are
introduced to such personalities as Prahläda, Dhruva, and so on. Besides them,
there were also so many other Vaiñëavas, contemporaries of Dhruva and Prahläda,
whose names are not recorded since only the prominent people have been
mentioned. Dhruva, the son of Manu, and Prahläda are grandsons of Kaçyapa Muni,
a präjapati, progenitor. They are our earliest ancestors. Thus, the pure
vaiñëava-dharma has existed since the dawn of history. As history advanced,
innumerable wise sages and devotees plus the royal races of the Solar and Lunar
dynasties lit up the firmament by their activities and the subsequent chronicles
thereof. They were all devotees of Çré Viñëu.

“The historical records of the three previous ages of Satya-yuga, Tretä-yuga,
and Dväpara-yuga show that these times were blessed with an abundance of saintly
Vaiñëavas. In the present age of Kali-yuga, Southern India has born illustrious
spiritual sons, Çré Rämänuja, Çré Madhväcärya and Çré Viñëusvämé, and in western
India, Çré Nimbäditya Çvamé has appeared. All these great preachers were
Vaiñëavas who inspired many millions to embrace the pure path of
vaiñëava-dharma. By their mercy alone, perhaps more than half the population of
India was able to transcend this ocean of material nescience and attain the
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Moreover, in Bengal and Orissa
the Lord of our heart, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, has delivered so many fallen and
wretched souls. Tell me, have you still not realized the superior position of
the vaiñëava-dharma, even after reading and hearing all these facts?”

Caturbhuja, “Of course I do, but how can you designate Prahläda as a Vaiñëava?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “A proper analysis of the çästra is required. Çré Prahläda
rejected mäyävädé influenced impersonal brahma-jïäna realization of his tutors,
Çaëòa and Amarka, and opted to chant harinäma, understanding this as the pure
essence of all spiritual activities. Hence, there is no doubt that Prahläda was
a pure Vaiñëava devotee. The real point is that only an unbiased assessment of
the scriptures will lead to a correct comprehension of the siddhänta, scriptural
conclusion.”

Caturbhuja, “If we assume that the vaiñëava-dharma is sanätana, then what can be
the unique contribution of Çré Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu, giving Him such
special honour and status?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Vaiñëava-dharma is like a lotus flower gradually
blossoming with the passage of time. First, comes the bud, slowly the bud begins
to grow, and then the petals open in a breath-taking bloom, spreading their
fragrance all around. 

“At the beginning of creation the four branches of knowledge were expressed to
Lord Brahmä. They are bhägavata-jïäna, knowledge of the Absolute Truth as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; mäyä-vijïäna, scientific knowledge of external
energy of the Lord; sädhana-bhakti, devotional service in practice; and prema,
the final goal of pure love of Godhead. At this tender budding stage of
Vaiñëavism, these four branches were encapsulated as seeds in the four original
verses of the Bhägavatam known as the Catuù-çloké. When Prahläda arrived, the
buds appeared from these seeds. Then gradually, with the advent of Bädaräyaëa
Vedavyäsa, the buds opened and the petals of the lotus flower of vaiñëava-dharma
were revealed by the different Vaiñëava äcäryas. With the descent of Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu, the flower has finally burst into full bloom, diffusing its
heady scent for the eager nostrils of the entire universe.

“Çré Caitanya revealed and disseminated the process of chanting harinäma as the
only means to achieve prema. This awakening of kåñëa-prema is the most esoteric
aspect of the vaiñëava-dharma and Çré Caitanya mercifully distributed this
science for the highest benefit of all human society. Previously, had anyone
ever revealed and propagated this process of hari-näma-saìkértana? The practice
of hari-näma-saìkértana has always been proposed in the Vedas as the scriptural
treasure par excellence. Yet, hari-näma-saìkértana was never preached in a
manner that made it easily available and fully comprehensible to the general
mass of human society. Certainly, the general populace were not widely inspired
to introduce the chanting into their lives and translate it into a central and
constant spiritual practice. However, hari-näma-saìkértana is so wonderful! Tell
me, was this repository of divine nectar ever distributed with such joyous
abandon before the advent of Çré Caitanya?”

Caturbhuja, “Well, if singing and chanting is so effective, then why is it not
popular in the paëòita circles?” 

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “In the age of Kali the meaning of the word paëòita has
been perverted. The scriptures define the word paëòa as a bright and acute
intellect, and one who possesses paëòa is a paëòita. However, presently a
paëòita is someone who can aimlessly juggle words under the pretence of logic
and rhetoric, or one who presumes to explain the småti-çästras solely with the
view of entertaining his audience. How can one expect such so-called paëòitas to
realize the profound importance of the religious science, what to speak of
making others understand it?

“A sincere and objective scrutiny of all scriptures will certainly lead to the
conviction that logic and rhetoric, etc., are not the essence or goal. Those who
are expert in self-deception and deluding the public are indeed the paëòitas of
Kali-yuga. Presently, all the so-called paëòita circles are simply engrossed in
sophism and word jugglery. Subjects such as the ultimate human destination; the
purpose of life; the eternal interrelationships between jéva, Éçvara, and the
çaktis of Éçvara; the prime necessity of humanity and the means to acquire it;
and so on, are never discussed. Yet, only when these topics of eternal truth and
absolute reality are brought into focus can we expect the knowledge of prema and
hari-näma-saìkértana to become familiar amongst the people.”

Caturbhuja, “I admit there are hardly any good paëòitas. Nevertheless, tell me
why the upper class brähmaëas have not taken up vaiñëava-dharma. The brahminical
caste is a sättvikä group established in the mode of goodness. They are
generally inclined towards the path of truth and noble deeds, yet why are they
mostly antagonistic to vaiñëava-dharma?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “You have questioned me and so I am compelled to tell you
the truth. We Vaiñëavas are not here to find faults in others. Sir, if you will
not be hurt or enraged and are sincere about learning the truth, then I am
prepared to answer your last question.”

Caturbhuja, “Actually, studying the scriptures has made us very much in favour
of upholding the good qualities like moderation, self-control, tolerance, etc.,
therefore it is not at all difficult for us to listen to you. Please offer us a
lucid explanation and we will certainly take your good spiritual instructions to
heart.”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Please note that Çré Rämänuja, Çré Madhväcärya, Çré
Viñëusvämé, and Çré Nimbäditya were all brähmaëas by birth. Each of them had
thousands of disciples who were brähmaëas. Our Çré Caitanya of Bengal was a
Vedic brähmaëa; Çré Nityänanda was a high caste räòhéya-brähmaëa; and Çré
Advaita Prabhu was a värendra-brähmaëa. Even the gosvämés and mahätmäs, the
intimate associates of Çré Caitanya, were mostly from the brähmaëa class. In
addition, an impressive number of brähmaëa stalwarts have joined the ranks of
the Vaiñëava preachers to disseminate this pure vaiñëava-dharma worldwide.
Therefore, why do you claim that higher caste brähmaëas do not admire
vaiñëava-dharma?

“We know that mostly all the high-born brähmaëas hold vaiñëava-dharma in esteem.
However, some, as a result of bad hereditary traits, depraved company, and wrong
upbringing are hostile towards the vaiñëava-dharma. Of course, this attitude
certainly does not give a good account of their brähmaëa background. It simply
reflects their misfortune and degradation.

“The çästras hold the view that particularly in Kali-yuga properly qualified
brähmaëas are scarce. These few select and qualified brähmaëas are Vaiñëavas.
From the moment of initiation into the gäyatré-mantra—the mantra that
personifies the Vedas and who is a devotee of Çré Viñëu—a brähmaëa is factually
embracing vaiñëava-dharma by having been thus initiated into a purely
vaiñëava-mantra. Yet, on account of the ill influence of the deteriorating
times, the deluded brähmaëa unfortunately accepts reinitiation by bogus
non-Vedic methods and rejects his original vaiñëava-dharma. However, this small
number of mislead vaiñëava-brähmaëas must not lead you to draw a wrong
conclusion.”

Caturbhuja, “Why do the majority of the Vaiñëavas apparently come from the lower
castes?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “There is no doubt about it. Most persons from the lower
castes readily accept their meek and stricken position, thus evoking the
compassion of the Vaiñëava sädhus. No one can become a Vaiñëava without first
receiving the mercy of the Vaiñëavas. A person cannot become humble, if he is
intoxicated with high caste, position, lineage, wealth, etc. Such persons devoid
of humility are not likely to attract the mercy of the Vaiñëavas.”

Caturbhuja, “I think I have heard enough about this topic. I see you are
gradually leading the conversation to the subject of the disparaging scriptural
quotes about the brähmaëas of Kali-yuga. I feel extremely disheartened when I
hear those scriptural quotes, such as the one in the Varäha Puräëa: 

räkñasäù kalim äçritya 
jäyante brahma-yoniñu

“‘Demons, taking advantage of Kali-yuga, take birth in brähmaëa families.’ 

“Therefore, I want to go on to other topics. Why do the Vaiñëavas disregard Çré
Çaìkaräcärya, a fathomless ocean of knowledge?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “I am surprised to hear this. We regard Çaìkaräcärya as an
incarnation of Lord Çiva. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has instructed us to honour
him as an äcärya. We reject only the philosophy of mäyäväda preached by him.
This mäyäväda philosophy is not rooted in the Vedas; it is merely a disguised
form of Buddhism. In order to keep the demons and atheists deluded and in
ignorance, the Bhagavän instructed Çré Çaìkaräcärya to pervert the philosophy of
the Vedas and the Gétä by propagating monism. How can we fault the äcärya on
this account and thus censure him?

“Lord Buddha was also an incarnation of the Supreme Lord, widely broadcasting a
philosophy which went against the Vedic tenets. However, does any civilized
person castigate him for it? One may argue that such actions of Bhagavän and
Lord Çiva are not well planned because they are discriminatory. My answer is
that Bhagavän is the well-wishing universal father and Lord Çiva His chief
executive. They are both omniscient, all auspicious and can never make the
mistake of being prejudiced. Those amongst the human beings who are ignorant and
small-minded cannot appreciate the profundity of Their works and so they end up
foolishly berating the Lord and His pure devotee.

“A knowledgeable person must not make loose comments such as: ‘This act of
Éçvara was not appropriate; He should have done this or that.’ Human beings
cannot hazard opinions on topics beyond the jurisdiction of their limited
intellect. Éçvara alone knows the urgency of keeping the atheistic demons
imprisoned in the mäyäväda thought. We, the human beings, can neither fully
fathom the reason for our existence, nor understand the expediency of our
extinction at the time of mahä-pralaya, total annihilation. Yet, all this is a
part of the pastimes of Çré Bhagavän. The devotees of Çré Hari simply relish
hearing about His pastimes, never quarrelling or disagreeing with them.”

Caturbhuja, “Yet, why do you say that the mäyäväda philosophy is contrary to the
ethics of the Vedas, Vedänta, and Gétä?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “After properly scrutinizing the Upaniñads and the
Vedänta-sütra can you pinpoint verses or aphorisms in support of the mäyäväda
theory? I will shed appropriate light on their meanings. Initially, some hint of
mäyäväda thought can be detected in certain Vedic verses, but again, if these
verses are seen in their entirety and in their full context, even these hints
quickly evaporate.” 

Caturbhuja, “Frankly speaking, I have studied neither the Upaniñads, nor the
Vedänta-sütra; yet I am well prepared for any discussion upon nyäya, for I am
conversant in sophism and dialectics. I have browsed through the Gétä, but do
not possess a fair grasp of its importance, therefore I admit defeat. 

“Oh yes! There is another matter I would like to hear about from you, as I am
sure a paëòita of your stature will be able to make me understand. Why do the
Vaiñëavas honour only viñëu-prasäda and disregard the prasäda of the devas and
devés?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “First of all, I am not a paëòita, I am a very ignorant
man. You must understand that whatever I speak is on the strength of the mercy
of my guru, Çréla Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé. The çästras are a vast,
unlimited ocean—no single person could possibly study them all entirely. Çréla
Gurudeva has churned this ocean and given me the essence, which I have received
fully confident that this siddhänta is concordant with the entirety of çästra.

“Now, the answer to your question: ‘Do the Vaiñëavas disregard the prasäda
remnants of the devas and devés?’ Çré Kåñëa is the only and uncontested Supreme
Personality of Godhead. All devas and devés are His devotees, solely owned by
Him. Certainly, Vaiñëavas always honour and never deride the prasäda remnants of
devotees.

“Devotion to the Supreme Lord is enhanced by accepting the prasäda remnants of
the Lord’s devotees, known as mahä-prasäda. There are, indeed, other excellent
devotional objects besides the prasäda remnants; for example, the devotee’s
foot-dust and his footbath water, also known as caraëämåta, nectar from the
feet. The main point is that if a mäyävädé worships or offers foodstuff to any
deva, because his consciousness is polluted by monism, the devas will reject his
worship and offering. I can give myriad quotes from numerous çästras in support
of this point, if you require such.

“Truly, the mäyävädés worship only the devas. Moreover, if one accepts foodstuff
offered to devas by mäyävädés, one’s devotion will be impaired and one will
offend Bhaktidevé. However, when a pure Vaiñëava offers Çré Kåñëa prasädam to
the devas and devés, they receive it jubilantly and dance with joy. Then, in
turn, when a Vaiñëava accepts these remnants, he immediately experiences
exultation.

“Now see the all-powerful strength of the scriptural injunctions. In the
yoga-çästra, it is mentioned that a yoga practitioner must not take the remnants
of a deva. However, surely this does not imply that yogis disrespect deva
prasäda. Yet, solitary meditation is improved if such a yogi abstains from
eating such prasäda. Similarly, on the path of bhakti, a devotee must accept
prasäda offered only to Bhagavän, not to any deva or devé. Otherwise progress in
one-pointed çuddha-bhakti is hindered. Similarly, this does not indicate
disregard to deva prasäda. The abstinence from deva prasäda as recommended in
the scriptures actually helps the sädhakas to advance towards their respective
spiritual goals.”

Caturbhuja, “Much obliged! I have understood this point. Now please tell me why
you are opposed to animal sacrifice, which is endorsed by the scriptures.” 

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “According to the purport of the scriptures, animal
sacrifice is not prescribed. The following excerpt from a verse in the Vedas
denounces the killing of animals: 

nä himsyät sarväëi bhütäni 

“‘One should not commit violence to any living entity.’

“As long as the nature of a person is controlled by the guëas of tama and raja,
he remains engrossed in sex life, meat-eating, and the taking of intoxicants.
The Vedas clearly do not agree with these undesirable acts. The real opinion of
the Vedas is that as long as human beings have not elevated themselves to the
level of sattva-guëa and are thereby able to renounce sex, non-vegetarian food,
and the addiction of intoxication, then they may legally marry to help
themselves curb the basic instinct of sex, they may eat only sacrificial animals
as non-vegetarian food, and in specific religious rituals they may drink wine.
Gradually, these checks used as deterrents will fully free them from these
undesirable activities. This is the actual Vedic understanding; the Vedas never
advise the killing of animals. For example, the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 11.5.11,
states:

loke vyaväyämiña-madya-sevä
nityä hi jantor na hi tatra codanä
vyavasthitis teñu viväha-yajïa
surä-grahair äsu nivåttir iñöä

“‘In this material world the conditioned soul is always inclined to sex,
meat-eating and intoxication. Therefore, the religious scriptures never actually
encourage such activities. Although the scriptural injunctions provide for sex
through sacred marriage, for meat-eating through sacrificial offerings, and for
intoxication through the acceptance of ritual cups of wine, such ceremonies are
meant for the ultimate purpose of renunciation.’

“The Vaiñëavas are of the opinion that if a tamasic or räjasic person desires to
act in such irresponsible manner, let him do so. Nevertheless, a sattvika person
must refrain from these acts. Hear another quote from the Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
1.13.47, where Närada Muni gives the instruction:

ahastäni sahastänäm
apadäni catuñ-padäm
phalgüni tatra mahatäà
jévo jévasya jévanam

“‘Those who are devoid of hands are prey for those who have hands. Those devoid
of legs are prey for the four-legged. The weak are the subsistence of the
strong. And the general rule holds that one living being is food for another.’

“Once again, in the Manu Småti, 5.56, we find:

na mäàsa-bhakñaëe doñe 
na madye na ca maithune
pravåttir eñä bhütänäà 
nivåttis tu mahä-phalä

 “‘The natural propensity of human beings is toward sensual enjoyment, meat
eating, and intoxication; yet, by discarding these propensities a person gains a
wonderful fortune.’”

Caturbhuja, “Very well! However, what is your attitude towards the çräddha
ceremony, the offering of oblations to the forefathers, which helps to repay the
debt of a man to his father. Why are the Vaiñëavas not in favour of such
ceremonies?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “Actually, the Vaiñëavas are not against karmis performing
the çräddha ceremony. In this context, the Çrémad Bhägavatam, 11.5.41, states:

devarñi-bhütäpta-nåëäà pitèëäà
na kiìkaro näyam åëé ca räjan
sarvätmanä yaù çaraëaà çaraëyaà
gato mukundaà parihåtya kartam

“‘O King, one who has given up all material duties and has taken full shelter of
the lotus feet of Mukunda, who offers shelter to all, is not indebted to the
devas, great sages, ordinary living beings, relatives, friends, mankind, or even
to one’s forefathers who have passed away. Since all such classes of living
entities are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, one who has surrendered to the
Lord’s service has no need to serve such persons separately.’

“Therefore, a devotee who has surrendered his life to the Supreme Lord is not
required to perform the çräddha ceremony of the karma-käëòa process in order to
repay the debts to the forefathers. He is advised to simply worship the Supreme
Lord and offer Him bhoga, foodstuff. By offering it to the Lord, the bhoga is
converted into prasäda and is then offered to and partaken of by the deceased
family members.”

Caturbhuja, “When does a person become eligible to perform çräddha in this
manner?”

Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, “From the day a person develops faith and respect for the
chanting kåñëa-näma, and for hearing topics related to Kåñëa consciousness, he
becomes a Vaiñëava and acquires this eligibility. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
11.20.9, comments:

tävat karmäëi kurvéta
na nirvidyeta yävatä
mat-kathä-çravaëädau vä
çraddhä yävan na jäyate

“‘One should continue to perform the Vedic ritualistic activities until one
actually becomes detached from material sense gratification and develops faith
in hearing and chanting about Me.’”

Caturbhuja, “I am truly happy for this chance to speak with you. I have heard a
very subtle and wise analysis of these topics from you, convincing me that you
are a fine scholar and awakening, indeed, my faith in vaiñëava-dharma. This has
given me immense pleasure. Well, my dear Harihara, what need is there for
further debate. These Vaiñëavas possess vast knowledge—they are the champions of
scriptural debate. Whatever we may have to say in order to protect our
hereditary brahminical business, it is certainly an irrefutable fact that such a
brilliant super-excellent scholar and Vaiñëava as Çré Nimäi Paëòita was never,
nor will ever again be born in Bengal, perhaps not throughout the entire length
and breath of India. Now let us depart to our homes across the Gaìgä. The day is
coming to an end.” 

Caturbhuja Nyäyaratna stood up with his associates, sang out, “Haribol!
Haribol!” and began to walk away. The Vaiñëavas began to chant jubilantly, “Jay
Çacénandana! Jay Çacénandana! All glory to the son of Çacémätä, Nimäi!” and
broke out into a stately dance.

Thus ends the tenth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: The Age and History of
Nitya-dharma

JDH 11: Nitya-dharma and Deity Worship

Chapter Eleven
Nitya-dharma and Deity Worship

On the western bank of the Gaìgä, the peaceful hamlet of Kuliyä Pähärpura basked
in its recently acquired glory. This pastoral community of Navadvépa-dhäma is
situated within the transcendental island of Koladvépa, where the renowned Çré
Mädhava däsa Caööopädhyäya—also known as Chakauré Caööopädhyäya—resided during
the era of Çré Caitanya. His son, Çréla Vaàçévadanänanda Öhäkura—thus named
because he was the incarnation of Çré Kåñëa’s vaàçé, flute—became an eminent
personality of immense influence. All this was possible by the grace of Çré
Caitanya. 

Çréla Vaàçévadanänanda was also highly honoured for another reason. He was
greatly favoured by Çrématé Viñëupriyä devé, the wife of Çré Caitanya. After the
disappearance of Çrématé Viñëupriyä devé, Vaàçévadanänanda transferred the
Deities she had personally worshiped from Çré Mäyäpura to Kuliyä Pähärpura, and
he and his descendants continued to worship the Deities there. Although
Vaàçévadanänanda and family later moved from Kuliyä Pähärpura to Çrépäö
Bäghanäpärä—being fortunate enough to receive the blessings and association of
Çré Jähnavä Mätä, the wife of Çré Nityänanda Prabhu—the family arranged for
Vaiñëavas from Mälaïcha to continue worship of the Deities of Çrématé Viñëupriyä
devé in the temple at Kuliyä Pähärpura.

In the time of Çré Caitanya, the original town of Navadvépa was on the eastern
bank of the Gaìgä. Kuliyä was across on the western bank and now consisted of
several notable hamlets, among them Cinäòäìgä. Once a certain devotee from the
Cinäòäìgä merchant community organized a spiritual fair on the premises of the
celebrated Kuliyä Pähärpura temple to which many brähmaëa paëòitas and all
Vaiñëavas from within a thirty-two mile radius were invited. 

The festival day saw a teeming mass of Vaiñëavas pouring into Kuliyä from all
around. Ananta däsa Bäbäjé and others came from Nåsiàhapallé; Goräcända däsa
Bäbäjé and his group came from Mäyäpura; Näräyaëa däsa Bäbäjé with his
associates from Bilva-puñkariëé; the famous Narahari däsa led his group from Çré
Modadruma; Çré Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé, Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé, and so on,
came from Çré Godruma; and Çré Çacénandana däsa with his group arrived from
Samudragadh. They and many hundreds more of other Vaiñëavas began to arrive for
the festival, resplendent with ürdhva-puëòra, vertical tilaka markings, upon
their foreheads indicating that their bodies were temples of Çré Hari. Strands
of tulasé beads were around the necks of the Vaiñëavas and the names of Çré
Caitanya and Çré Nityänanda were finger-painted in luminescent tilaka paste upon
different parts of their upper limbs and foreheads. They all carried a japa-mälä
beadbag with their right hand or slung down from their necks. Many were loudly
chanting the mahä-mantra:

hare kåñëa hare Kåñëa
kåñëa kåñëa hare hare
hare räma hare räma
räma räma hare hare 

Groups of Vaiñëavas mingled in the crowd singing gaily and marking time with
mådaìga and karatälas to sweet bhajans describing the pastimes of Çré Gauräìga.
Some devotees were lifting up their arms while dancing and chanting:

çré-kåñëa-caitanya
prabhu-nityänanda
çré-advaita gadädhara
çréväsädi-gaura-bhakta-vånda 

Many Vaiñëavas spontaneously expressed their overwhelming, indescribable joy
with silent unrestrained tears, while all the hairs of their bodies stood upon
end. The exhilarating rhythms of the mådaìgas pulsated like volcanic shock waves
throughout the rapturous throng. Some Vaiñëavas cried out in sublime anguish
intermingled with ecstatic weeping, “Oh my dearest Çré Gauräìga! When will my
eyes be qualified to behold Your divine pastimes that are eternally performed
here in Navadvépa?” The women of Kuliyä, all devotees of Çré Gauräìga, were
amazed to see the wonderful ecstatic symptoms exhibited by the pure Vaiñëavas
and praised their great spiritual good fortune. 

The moving mass of Vaiñëavas surged slowly forward and soon arrived at the
näöya-maëòira, the kértana hall directly attached to the Deity altar of the
Kuliyä Pähärpura temple, where previously Çré Gauräìga would perform saìkértana
and dance. The businessman devotee sponsoring the festival rushed out to meet
the Vaiñëavas. He wore a piece of cloth around his neck as a sign of submission
upon welcoming his honoured guests, and falling at their feet he rolled upon the
ground to express his heartfelt gratitude and humility. The Vaiñëavas were then
ushered into the näöya-maëòira, where they gradually settled down.

Immediately, a group of temple sevaites came forward to garland the Vaiñëavas
with prasädé-mälä, previously offered Deity garlands. The lead singers began the
Çré Caitanya-maìgala-gétä—sublime invocatory songs narrating the nectarous
pastimes of Çré Gauräìga, which further filled the hearts of the Vaiñëavas with
divine exultation. However, as the Vaiñëavas reached the heights of ecstasy, the
temple gateman came in to make an announcement to the temple authorities. A new
group of guests, led by the chief Muslim priest, Mullah Badrud-dén Sähib, of
Sätsäika Paraganä had just arrived unexpectedly. Requesting an audience with a
few Vaiñëava paëòitas, the group was waiting in the outer courtyard reception
area of the temple.

This news spread fast, arousing a murmur of disappointment at such an untimely
intrusion into the exhilarating recital. Upon the enquiry of Çré Kåñëa däsa
Bäbäjé Mahäçaya of Çré Madhyadvépa further detail was revealed, “The respected
Mullah Sähib—considered the most eminent religious scholar of the entire Muslim
community—desires a spiritual discussion with Vaiñëava scholars. The Mullah
Sähib though dedicated to disseminating his Muslim dharma nevertheless declares
that he holds no antagonistic feelings towards other dharmas. He is held in high
regard even by the crown in Delhi and solicits the opportunity to have an
exchange upon scriptural topics with a few Vaiñëavas.” The temple authorities
humbly suggested that a number of Vaiñëava paëòitas could come forward for a
çästric discussion to display the excellence of vaiñëava-dharma. 

A number of Vaiñëavas responded quickly, realizing that a talk with the Mullah
Sähib provided a wonderful opportunity to broadcast vaiñëava-dharma. After
taking counsel, they decided to send four Vaiñëava paëòitas as representatives:
Goräcända däsa Bäbäjé of Çré Mäyäpura, Vaiñëava däsa Bäbäjé of Godruma, Prema
däsa Bäbäjé of Jahnu-nagara, and Kali-pävana däsa Bäbäjé of Campahaööa. This
four should start the discussion with the Mullah Sähib, while the other
Vaiñëavas could also join the discussion after the completion of the Çré
Caitanya-maìgala-gétä. The four selected Bäbäjés arose, loudly glorifying, “Jaya
Çré Gauräìga! Jaya Çré Nityänanda!” and left the assembly following the mahänta,
head temple priest, for the outer courtyard, where the Mullah Sähib with his
group was waiting. 

The outer courtyard was a large area cooled by the shade of a huge peepul tree.
When the Mullah Sähib saw the Vaiñëavas approaching, he and his followers stood
up as a sign of respect and graciously welcomed them. Knowing that the
all-pervading Supreme Lord Çré Väsudeva resides within the heart of all jévas in
the form of the Paramätmä and that all jévas are the servitors of Çré Kåñëa, the
Vaiñëavas reciprocated their sincere greetings and gave respect to the Paramätmä
within by performing daëòavats before the visitors. They then sat down facing
their respected Muslim guests.

The scene was indeed extraordinary. On one side, fifty Muslim scholars were
sitting finely attired with white flowing beards, several yards behind them
their regally ornamented horses stood tethered to posts. Opposite them, four
self-realized Vaiñëava saints of divine aura were sitting with placid humility
as the open space behind and around filled rapidly with inquisitive local
people.

Paëòita Goräcända däsa Bäbäjé spoke first, addressing the Muslim scholars with a
steady voice, “O great souls, why have you summoned people as insignificant as
us?” 

The famous Mullah Badrud-Dén Sähib humbly replied, “Saläm! We wish to ask you a
few questions.” 

Paëòita Goräcända replied, “As far as our knowledge allows we will attempt to
answer your profound enquiries.”

The Mullah Sähib started, “Dear brethren! History shows that Hindus have since
the dawn of time worshiped many devas and devés. However, we read in our sacred
book, the Koran-sharéf, that Allah is one, not many. He is formless, and that to
sculpt His image and then to worship such an image is a grievous sin. To
eradicate this doubt, I have inquired among many brähmaëa paëòitas. They all
agree with us that Allah is niräkära, formless, but they argue that since it is
impossible to meditate upon a formless entity, so an imaginary form of Allah
must be made to facilitate meditation. Allah should then be worshiped in that
form. However, we are not satisfied with this answer.

“The Koran states that an invented material image of Allah—we call it byüt,
matter—is the work of Satan. Byüt-parasta, idol worship, is absolutely
forbidden. Far from pleasing Allah, it rather brings down His wrath. We have
heard that the original propagator of your religion, Çré Caitanya deva, has
pruned out the discrepancies in the Hindu religion. Yet, He, also, supports
byüt-parasta. Therefore, we have come to ask the Vaiñëavas why they have not
given up byüt-parasta, despite having delved so deeply into the scriptures.”

The Vaiñëava paëòitas were inwardly amused by the thoughts of the Mullah Sähib.
However, they requested Goräcända Bäbäjé to reply, who quickly accepted this
responsibility, “The Great One, whom you call Allah, is known to us as Bhagavän.
The Supreme Being is one and of the same absolute nature even though the sacred
texts of the Koran and the Puräëas have designated Him by different names
according to their different languages and countries. Naturally, whatever
nomenclature describes the Supreme Godhead in the best and most accurate manner
is to be preferred. For this reason, we prefer the name Bhagavän to other names
such as Allah, Brahman, Paramätmä, and so on.

“Allah means the One Being who is the greatest above everyone and everything.
However, we do not consider that a name indicating the quality of unsurpassable
greatness alone can be considered the ultimate name for the Absolute Supreme
Personality since we do not consider greatness as the highest or most inclusive
description of the Lord. Rather, we consider that the name that indicates most
comprehensively the camatkäritä, infinite wonder and uniqueness, of the Supreme
Lord’s unlimited opulence should take precedence. 

“A name indicating unsurpassable greatness definitely does indicate a certain
amount of this uniqueness and wonder; however, the complement to greatness,
ultimate minuteness, conveys a further aspect of this uniqueness and wonder.
Although the name Allah indicates ultimate greatness, it does not indicate
ultimate minuteness, which is a further opulence of the Lord. Therefore, the
word Allah does not completely convey the complete camatkäritä of all the
opulences of the Supreme Lord. In contrast, the designation Bhagavän does denote
the entire camatkäritä of the opulences of the Supreme Lord. 

“Samagra aiçvarya, absolute unlimited opulence, which includes absolute
magnitude and infinite minuteness plus unlimited further opulences, is only the
first of the aspects of Godhead indicated by the name Bhagavän. 

“Sarva-çaktimattä, omnipotence, is the second aspect of the Lord indicated by
the name Bhagavän. Impossibility, referring to limitations of consciousness and
activity, is not applicable to the acintya-çakti, inconceivable potency, of the
Supreme Lord. By His acintya-çakti, the Lord is simultaneously niräkära and
säkära, with form, and thus personal. To say that the Lord is exclusively
niräkära impinges upon this inconceivable omnipotence. Through the agency of His
omnipotence, He simultaneously manifests His niräkära manifestation as well as
His säkära manifestation, which is His eternal transcendental form as the very
embodiment of His eternal pastimes. Allah, Brahman, and Paramätmä are generally
understood and worshiped solely as niräkära; therefore, in this light, they are
surely deficient in uniqueness and mystical wonder. 

“The third aspect that the name Bhagavän indicates is that He is eternally
maìgalamaya, all-auspicious, and yaça-purna, all-famous; thus, His pastimes are
fully nectarous. 

“The fourth aspect denoted by the term Bhagavän is unlimited saundarya, beauty.
The devoted living entities by acquisition of spiritually purified vision can
behold this beatific form of the Supreme Personality as the reservoir of all
beauty. 

“The fifth aspect indicated by Bhagavän is that the Supreme Person is the
embodiment of açeña-jïäna, unlimited knowledge. This implies that He is
absolutely immaculate, perfect and complete, the embodiment of transcendence,
the supreme spiritual object, and materially inscrutable. His beatific eternal
form as the Supreme Deity is the very embodiment of consciousness, beyond, as
you say, byüt, the material time and elements. 

“The sixth aspect indicated by Bhagavän is that even as the Éçvara of the entire
creation, the Lord remains disentangled, aloof from everything, and fully
independent by virtue of His excellence of renunciation. Thus, I have enunciated
the six primary characteristics of Bhagavän: opulence, power, fame, beauty,
knowledge, and renunciation.

“Furthermore, the Supreme Lord, Bhagavän, has two prakäça, manifestations:
aiçvarya, opulent majesty; and mädhurya, sweetness. The mädhurya prakäça is the
Supreme Well-wisher of the living entities; He comes to His devotees as the
dearest Lord of the heart, as Çré Kåñëa, or as Çré Caitanya. 

“If we consider byüt-parasta to be a term describing the improper worship of a
fictitious imaginary form of the Supreme Lord then this is certainly not
contrary to our Vaiñëava viewpoint. In vaiñëava-dharma, our practice is to
worship the eternal, absolutely spiritual, fully conscious Deity form of Çré
Bhagavän. Therefore, the Deity worship of the Vaiñëavas certainly cannot be
defined as byüt-parasta, satanic material idol worship. The description of
byüt-parasta given in certain texts is not an absolute and all encompassing law
to be applied without discrimination to bona fide Deity worship of the
transcendental form of the Lord. 

“Furthermore, everything depends on the intensity of faith and attachment of the
worshiper. The freer the worshiper is from the forces of byüt, the purer and
more transcendental will his Deity worship be. For example, you are the Mullah
Sähib; as a high priest and learned scholar, your heart is free from the
influence of byüt, but can your novice disciples be characterized like that? Are
their hearts devoid of intimate contact with byüt? And their level of their
attachment to byüt reflects in their standard of worship and meditation. They
may offer lip service to the niräkära form, but their thoughts are contaminated
with the forms of byüt.

“The pure method of worshiping the Supreme Lord’s transcendental Deity form is
certainly not possible for the general populace. Only those qualified persons
who having overcome the influence of matter are transcendentally situated and
can thus conceptualise spiritual form should perform Deity worship. I earnestly
entreat you to give this subject deep thought.”

Mullah Sähib, “I have seriously considered your points and I can say that the
six primary absolute attributes possessed by He who is called Bhagavän are
likewise mentioned in our Koran-sharéf in describing Allah. Therefore, let us
not overly dissect and analyse the etymology of the name, Allah. Allah is
Bhagavän, the possessor of unlimited opulence.”

Goräcända Bäbäjé, “Very good! Then you accept that the Supreme Being possesses
divine beauty. Thus, you affirm that beyond this material creation a spiritual
world exists where the Supreme Lord resides as the embodiment of beauty. This
very form of sublime transcendental exquisiteness is the Deity that we worship.”

Mullah Sähib, “Our holy Koran-sharéf also states that the Supreme Being
possesses an absolute spiritual body—hence there is no cause for rebuttal.
However, when one tries to make an image of that absolute transcendental form of
Allah, or Bhagavän, the image becomes a material replica—this we call byüt.
Worshiping byüt is not the same as worshiping the Supreme Lord. Now kindly
explain your viewpoint on this subject.”

Goräcända Bäbäjé, “The Vaiñëava scriptures espouse the worship of the pure and
transcendental Deity form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The elevated
devotees are not permitted to worship material objects. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
10.84.13, states:

yasyätma-buddhiù kuëape tri-dhätuke
sva-dhéù kalaträdiñu bhauma ijya-dhéù
yat-tértha-buddhiù salile na karhicij
janeñv abhijïeñu sa eva go-kharaù

“‘One who identifies his self as the inert body composed of mucus, bile and air,
who assumes his wife and family are permanently his own, who thinks that an
earthen image or the land of his birth are worshipable, or who sees a place of
pilgrimage as merely the water there, but who never identifies himself with,
feels kinship with, worships, visits, or hears from those sädhus residing at the
place of pilgrimage who are wise in spiritual truth—such a person is no better
than a cow or an ass.’

“Furthermore, in the Bhagavad-gétä, 9.25, we find: 

…bhütäni yänti bhütejyä…

“‘Those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth amongst such beings.’

“These statements clearly indicate that the worship of material objects and
ghosts and spirits is strongly censured. Yet, one fact must be noted: Human
beings acquire varying degrees of eligibility in spiritual activities according
to their level of knowledge and saàskära, purification. Therefore, the devotee
who has realized çuddha-cinmaya-bhäva, pure transcendence, is alone worthy of
worshiping the cinmaya, transcendental, Deity form of the Supreme Godhead.
Accordingly, lower eligibility is indicated by the lower degrees of knowledge
and purity.

“A neophyte kaniñöha-adhikäré, who is at the bottom of the scale of eligibility,
is unable to perceive çuddha-cinmaya-bhäva. If he meditates upon the Lord within
his mind, the image of the Lord he construes within his consciousness being a
fabricated form is clearly endowed with mundane qualities. To assume Divinity in
a sculpted earthly Deity form is ultimately identical to the neophyte’s
meditation upon an image of the Supreme Lord created within his mind from his
contaminated material consciousness. This is not the pure form of Deity worship;
nevertheless, for the neophyte such Deity worship is beneficial. Indeed, the
absence and prohibition of such Deity worship for the general ignorant mass of
people is inauspicious. For when spiritually neophyte people somehow become
inspired to approach the Supreme Lord, if they do not find a Deity form of Him,
they may feel disappointed and disconsolate.

“The religions which have no provision for Deity worship face the danger that
those children born into the religion and those just beginning spiritual
life—both of whom may have little or no understanding, or deep faith in
Godhead—may become overtly materialistic and even develop aversion towards the
Supreme Lord as a result of the absence of a Deity form upon which to fix their
minds. Therefore, Deity worship is the foundation of religion for general
humanity.

“The mahäjanas, highly elevated, unalloyed devotees of the Lord, perceive the
beautiful spiritual form of the Supreme Lord by dint of their pure consciousness
and perfect realization. These mahäjanas constantly meditate upon and worship
this sublime and transcendental form of the Lord, whom they see within their
hearts saturated with prema-bhakti. After long and deep meditation upon the
transcendental form of the Lord, eventually the consciousness of the pure
devotee extends to see the Lord’s presence within all objects of even the
material world. Out of mercy, these pure devotees delineate the transcendental
divine form of the Lord both verbally and physically in the Deity form. Thus, on
the basis of the instruction of the realized pure devotees who are forever
guided from within by the Lord Himself, the Deity form—an exact replica of the
spiritual form of the Lord—is portrayed externally in the material world as
non-different from the transcendental Supreme Lord.

“The self-realized uttama-adhikäré always perceives the Deity form as cinmaya, a
transcendental and direct manifestation of the Lord. The madhyama-adhikäré
perceives the Deity form as manomaya, conscious of his prayers, worship, and
devotion; however, his perception of the wholly transcendental nature of the
Deity form is constricted by the immaturity of his spiritual consciousness. The
präkåta-bhakta sees the Deity form initially as jaòamaya, material, but as his
consciousness and intelligence are gradually cleansed by the awakening of prema
he begins to worship the Deity form with increasingly spiritual perception and
understanding. Thus, we see that worship of the Deity is essential and
beneficial to all categories of devotees. Certainly, however, worshiping an
imaginary and concocted idol of Bhagavän as the Supreme Lord is forbidden in
vaiñëava-dharma.

“The Deity image of the actual eternal form of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is all-auspicious. Therefore, the Vaiñëava sampradäyas have recommended
and established Deity worship for all the three levels of devotees: uttama,
madhyama, and kaniñöha. There is no fault in this process and by this
arrangement human beings benefit at every step, ushering in sublime sanctity.
This is substantiated in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 11.14.26:

yathä yathätmä parimåjyate ’sau
mat-puëya-gäthä-çravaëäbhidhänaiù
tathä tathä paçyati vastu sükñmaà
cakñur yathaiväïjana-samprayuktam

“‘Medicated salve, collyrium, when applied to the eye, helps one see even the
finest of objects. Similarly, when the heart of the jéva is cleansed of
impurities by hearing and discussing transcendental topics about Me, he
perceives the most esoteric knowledge about My original spiritual form and the
purport of My pastimes.’

“Jévätmä is covered by material energy in the form of the material mind and
senses. Therefore, he is unable to understand properly his actual spiritual
nature and thus serve the Paramätmä feature of the Supreme Lord. Nevertheless,
through sädhana-bhakti, the elevating devotional process of hearing and
chanting, the jéva gains spiritual strength, which concomitantly weakens the
grip of material energy upon him. With the decrease of material influence, the
original nature of the jéva comes into brighter focus and direct perception of
Éçvara and activity in relationship to Éçvara become more distinct and natural. 

“Some thinkers consider that one should endeavour to realize the Absolute Truth
by the process of discarding all that is not Truth. This phenomenon they
describe as, ‘Discarding all objectives unrelated to actual truth—the self,’ and
‘Endeavouring to realize the self.’ Speaking this kind of word-jugglery
indicates that one has adopted the impotent process of dry empirical knowledge.
From where will the captivated jéva acquire the strength and discrimination to
remove the ultimately unreal illusion that powerfully covers his very self? Can
a prisoner confined to a cell be set free merely by desiring freedom? The
primary purpose of imprisonment is to evoke self-improvement in the offender. By
nature, the jéva is an eternal servant of Bhagavän and in disregarding and thus
forgetting this eternal truth he has committed a cardinal offence, thus causing
his own imprisonment. Removal of this offence is therefore the prerequisite for
his release from the material imprisonment. Since time immemorial, the jéva has
been entangled in the birth and death, happiness and distress, of material life
by the insurmountable pressure of Mäyä as a result of maintaining this offence
of disregard of Éçvara. 

“Nevertheless, if he somehow or other cultivates even a slight interest in the
spiritual activity of devotional service to the Éçvara by regularly taking
darçana of His Deity form and hearing lélä-kathä, narrations of Éçvara’s
pastimes, then he can very soon perceive the transcendental form of the Deity.
The devotional process of hearing and chanting steadily revives his original
spiritual nature, which gradually becomes firm and steady. The more the sädhaka
grows in purity and spirituality, the more he progresses along the path of
realising his innate bhäva, true spiritual mood and identity in relationship to
the Lord. Consequently, the sole recourse open to the absolute novice and
neophyte in spiritual life is to serve the Deity with faith and to hear and
chant the Deity’s transcendental glories and pastimes. This is the prime reason
why our mahäjanas have established the process of devotional service to the
Deity.”

Mullah Sahéb, “Is it not better to meditate in the mind upon the Supreme Being
rather than to model a form from the inert material elements?”

Goräcända Bäbäjé, “Both are the same. The mind, albeit a subtle material
element, is still a part of the mundane nature. The thoughts of the materially
engrossed mind are always contaminated by matter; thus, every product of the
mind is inert. For example, when we pronounce, ‘Brahman is all-pervasive,’ does
this indicate that we are actually able to fathom completely this quality of
Brahman’s ubiquity? I think not, the conditioned mind recoils from the infinite
all-pervasiveness of transcendental Brahman and grasps at the closest material
comparison of our experience—the vast, yet still limited, material sky. Again,
if an ordinary person should say, ‘I am meditating upon Brahman,’ his perception
of Brahman will inevitably be limited by time and space, both mundane
conditions. If the meditating mind cannot break the bonds of material time and
space and reach beyond them, how then can it perceive transcendence? By
rejecting a Deity formed of the gross elements such as earth or water and then
creating a mental image of Éçvara, we still find that we are worshipping an
image of Éçvara composed of the material elements. Therefore, both these forms
of worship, internal or external, involve the material elements. 

“Ultimately, no material element can act as a vehicle to bring us into contact
with the transcendental platform. The one indispensable element is bhäva, faith
and devotional feeling for the Supreme Personality of Godhead; such bhäva
resides only within the spirit soul—the jéva. Hearing and chanting harinäma and
the pastimes of the Supreme Lord and worshiping His Deity form provide the jéva
with the inspiration to be steady in devotional practice and thus strengthen his
bhäva. Eventually, this practice ascends to true çuddha-bhakti. At this point,
the purely spiritual form of the Supreme Godhead is revealed to the sädhaka.
Therefore, through this process of pure devotional service the transcendental
form of the Lord is revealed—an impossible task for the methods of karma or
jïana.”

Mullah Sähib, “Matter is distinct from God. Our tradition proclaims that Satan
has introduced the worship of Deities formed of material elements just to
enslave the jéva in material existence. In our opinion, it is better to avoid
such idol worship.”

Goräcända Bäbäjé, “Éçvara is one and unsurpassable; He has no rival. Everything
in the entire cosmic creation is created by Him and is subordinate to His will.
Therefore, He can be satisfied by any object when it is properly employed in His
worship. In fact, none of the objects or persons that are other than Éçvara that
a jéva may worship in forgetfulness of Éçvara can make Éçvara jealous or envious
in any way for He is Bhagavän, the fully renounced, all-auspicious Supreme
Benefactor and Well-wisher of everyone. Even if there were a Satan, then
certainly he could not possess even the slightest power to act against the
supreme will of Bhagavän. Ultimately, he could only be another jéva and
subservient to the Supreme Lord. However, according to our Vaiñëava
understanding such a gargantuan monster as the ‘Devil’ or ‘Satan’ does not
exist. Nothing can occur in this world contrary to the Lord’s plan, nor is it
possible for anyone to be independent of the Lord’s control.

“At this point one may pose the question, ‘If nothing is independent of the
Éçvara, then how was sin created?’ This is our answer: Jéva is the servant of
the Supreme Lord. Acknowledgement of this truth is called jïäna, or vidyä, but
forgetfulness is known as avidyä, nescience. For whatever reasons, certain jévas
act in avidyä and thus sow the seed of sin in their hearts. However, the eternal
associates of the Supreme Lord, the nitya-pärñada jévas, do not sow the seed of
sin in their hearts. Instead of inventing the extraordinary myth of Satan and
further imagining a certain object as him, it would be more fruitful to
recognize and understand the avidyä within our own hearts as the cause of our
sinful activity. 

“Therefore, to worship the çré-mürté of Éçvara in the material elements is not
an offence. Actually, such worship is most essential for those of low devotional
qualification and particularly auspicious for those of high spiritual
eligibility. To consider Deity worship as unbeneficial is futile rhetoric and
mere dogma—scriptural evidence and logic cannot be found to support such a
view.”

Mullah Sähib, “The worship of the Deity formed from matter cannot increase the
spiritual perception because the mind of the worshiper remains confined thus to
the properties of matter.”

Goräcända Bäbäjé, “If we study the ancient historical accounts of those who
became great devotees of the transcendental Lord we can understand your proposal
to be mistaken. It is a matter of record that many neophyte devotees began their
devotional practice by worship of the Deity form. As they continued their Deity
worship in the association of pure devotees their devotional mood gradually
deepened, they increasingly realized the transcendental and conscious nature of
the Deity form, and eventually they plunged deeply into the ocean of
transcendental devotional love.

“Therefore, the unavoidable conclusion is that sat-saìga is the root of all
devotional advancement. The association of pure devotees intoxicated with
kåñëa-prema naturally awakens one’s innate affection for Çré Hari. As this
affection gradually increases, one progressively discards the material
conception of the Deity. This unfolding of spiritual consciousness brings the
greatest good fortune. In contrast, the followers of non-Äryan religions
generally oppose the worship of the Deity form. However, how many of them have
actually realized cinmaya-bhäva, the transcendental all-conscious nature of
Bhagavän and His spiritual creation. Instead they are spending their time in
sophistry and malicious argumentation—when can they expect to experience true
devotion to the Lord?”

Mullah Sähib, “To perform Deity worship in divine devotional consciousness may
be considered living without aberration. However, how can the worship of dogs,
cats, snakes, and even of promiscuous men be permissible and considered as a
devotional process? Our divine prophet has especially castigated such
byüt-parasta.”

Goräcända Bäbäjé, “Generally, human beings are by nature grateful to the Supreme
Lord. They may wallow in sinful life, yet on occasion they consider a Supreme
Being as the actual ultimate controller of everything and bow down in awe to the
mighty and inexplicable wonders that occur in the world. Thus, the ignorant and
foolish—prodded by their innate gratitude to the Supreme Being—generally revere
rivers, mountains, the sun, giant and powerful beasts, etc. They confide their
inner thoughts and feelings to these objects and display surrender to them.
Actually, cinmaya-bhakti, the divine process of devotion to the transcendent
Lord, on the one hand, and this type of worship of objects and spirits, on the
other, are irreconcilably different. Yet, the ignorant person’s acknowledgement
of and grateful obeisance to the Supreme Godhead through these material objects
certainly give him much pious benefit, which gradually bestows a positive
spiritual effect. A little deliberation upon this topic will verify that these
less intelligent seekers cannot be condemned. 

“Worshiping, meditating upon, and offering prayers—as the Muslims do in namäz—to
the all-pervasive, formless, impersonal feature of Godhead is also bereft of
pure divine love of the transcendental Supreme Person. Where then, ultimately,
lies the distinction between such worship and the worship of, say, a cat or a
mountain? Our Vaiñëava view is that enhancing one’s attachment and affection for
the Supreme Lord—by whatever method—is crucial to one’s eventual realization of
the transcendental Absolute Truth. If, on the other hand, such less-enlightened
seekers are simply ridiculed and repudiated this may close their portal to
gradual elevation.

“Those who become sectarian by obstinately locking themselves into dogmatic
cults are soon diverted from lofty idealism, munificence, and liberality. They
deride and rail at anyone who does not follow their particular methodology in
religious practice. This is a serious aberration on their part.”

Mullah Sähib, “Are you suggesting then that everything is God and that all types
of worship to any object are tantamount to worshiping God? Is worshiping
something sinful also worshiping God? Moreover, is revering immoral proclivities
equivalent to devotion to God? Is God pleased with all these things?”

Goräcända Bäbäjé, “We do not designate everything as God. Certainly, the Supreme
Personality is distinct from all things—all that exists is created by God and is
under His divine sovereignty. However, as everything is related with the Supreme
Godhead, it is the natural prerogative of everyone to enquire about the presence
of God in all things. Repeated and sincere enquiry about the presence of the
Supreme in all things will gradually bestow increasing perception of the Supreme
Transcendental Person, thus leading to ultimate success according to the Vedic
aphorism: …jijïäsäsvädanävadhi… ‘Inquiry leads to experience.’ Therefore, even
indirect enquiry about the Supreme Lord will one day result in the realization
of transcendence.

“You are all very learned theologians. If you kindly consider these points with
a noble and open mind, then you will understand. We are poor and simple
Vaiñëavas and are not keen on participating in lengthy debates. With your
permission, may we return to hear the musical narration, Çré
Caitanya-maìgala-gétä, songs glorifying the all-auspicious pastimes of Çré
Caitanya?”

Mullah Sähib’s reaction regarding the discussion was not discernible from his
demeanour. He sat placidly for a short time, then said, “I am pleased to hear
your analysis and explanations. I will return another time and ask more
questions. It is late now and I desire to go back to my home.”

Mullah Sähib walked at the head of his small group of followers to their
patiently waiting horses, mounted, and rode off to Sätsäika Paraganä. The
Vaiñëavas chanted kåñëa-näma in jubilant chorus and rejoined the others, who
were still engrossed in the kértana of Çré Caitanya-maìgala-gétä.

Thus ends the eleventh chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma and Deity
Worship

JDH 12: Nitya-dharma: Sädhana, the Means of Attainment, and Sädhya, the Ultimate
Goal

Chapter Twelve
Nitya-dharma: Sädhana, the Means of Attainment, and Sädhya, the Ultimate Goal

Çré Navadvépa-maëòala, consisting of nine transcendental islands, is the
foremost place of pilgrimage in the entire universe. Like Çré Våndävana-dhäma,
it is spread over an area of thirty-two square miles. The maëòala is compared to
an eight-petal lotus flower with each of the eight petals representing one of
the transcendental islands. The ninth island is represented by the central
seed-vessel, which is the island of Antardvépa, in the centre of which is Çré
Mäyäpura. North of Çré Mäyäpura lies the island of Sémantadvépa with an
impressively tall temple dedicated to Çré Sémantiné devé. The Bilva-puñkariëé
Lake spreads itself over an area on the northern side of this temple, while the
Brähmaëa-puñkariëé Lake is found on the southern side. Lying there on the
northern periphery of Navadvépa-maëòala, these lakes with their adjourning areas
are popularly known as Simuliyä.

At the time of Çré Caitanya, the hamlet of Simuliyä was the seat of many erudite
scholars. One most learned resident of Simuliyä was Çré Nélämbara Cakravarté,
the father of Çré Çacémätä, and close to his old house now lived a Vedic
brähmaëa named Çré Vrajanätha Bhaööäcärya. Vrajanätha had attended the village
Sanskrit tola on the banks of Bilva-puñkariëé Lake, mastering in a short time
nyäya, the philosophy of logic and rhetoric. Even very famous and respected
paëòitas from all around and as far away as Mäyäpura, Godruma, Madhyadvépa,
Ämraghäöä, Samudragadh, Kuliyä, and Pürvasthalé were intimidated by the novel
arguments and rhetoric of Çré Vrajanätha Bhaööäcärya. In public debates and
large gatherings of paëòitas, the innovative and piercing arguments of Çré
Vrajanätha Nyäya-païcänana were like incendiary arrows burning to ashes every
proposal of his opponents. Of these paëòitas, an especially malicious one,
Naiyäyika Cüòämaëi, was particularly envious of Vrajanätha’s brilliance and had
decided to murder him. Deciding to do this by certain black rites from the
tantra-çästra, he went to the çmaçäna, crematorium, in Rudradvépa. There amongst
the ashes, he began to utter sinister mantras, throughout long days and nights,
calling forth the black powers of Death.

At midnight, the dark moon of amäväsya having spread a cover over the çmaçäna,
the brähmaëa invoked his worshipable and chosen goddess, Kälé, with powerful
mantras, entreating her as follows, “Dear Mä! In Kali-yuga, you are the only
deity worthy of worship. People say you are easily satisfied with just a few
incantations of mantra and thus readily offer to your supplicant his desired
boons. O noble and most formidable Goddess! Your humble servant has undertaken
gruelling pains for many days and nights in chanting your mantras. Kindly show
me your mercy just this one time. Oh Devé, I know I am riddled with wrongs, but
you are my mother, please overlook and excuse them. And now, kindly manifest
yourself to me!”

Crying out repeatedly in this manner, the incantations were chanted and a life
hung in the balance as Naiyäyika Cüòämaëi offered oblations into the sacrificial
fire for the death of Vrajanätha Nyäya-païcänana. Soon the powers of the mantras
began to manifest themselves: The sky became overcast, the winds howled, and
ear-shattering thunder crashed down. Momentary lightning flashes pierced the
eerie pall, revealing the ghastly forms of ghosts and demons. At first, the
paëòita was mortally afraid, but soon, bravely exerting his powers of reasoning
with the help of the sacrificial wine, he pulled himself together, steeled his
nerves, and pleaded, “O dear Mä! Kindly, do not delay any further!”

Just then, an ethereal voice from the sky echoed the words, “Give up your
worries. Vrajanätha will soon discontinue his rhetorical debates, renounce that
path, and become silent. You will no longer have to face him as an opponent.
Calm yourself and return home.” The divine prophecy thrilled Cüòämaëi and he
repeatedly bowed down before the image of Lord Çiva, the Lord of tantric rites,
returning home with a sprightly gait. 

At twenty-one, Vrajanätha Nyäya-païcänana had been crowned the unconquerable
regent of debate and scholasticism—the dig-vijayé paëòita, one who has conquered
all four directions. Voraciously, he had read the complete works of Çré
Gaìgeçopädhyäya, who had initiated a new system of logic known as navya-nyäya.
In addition, he had picked out many logical fallacies in Raghunätha (Käëäbhaööa)
Çiromaëi’s Dédhiti, which was a famous commentary on Gaìgeçopädhyäya’s
dissertation on nyäya, the Tattva-cintämaëi. Thereafter, he had started writing
his own independent purports. Material life had no attraction for him and he
spent no time in its contemplation; instead, the subjects of nyäya: semantics,
rhetoric, sophism, devising new counter-arguments, and so on, filled his world.
Using the logical tools of ghaöa, a clay pot; paöa, a piece of cloth; avaccheda,
the distinguishing property of an object; and vyavaccheda, the separation of one
object from another, he constantly considered the nature of objects, the nature
of time, and the peculiarities of liquids and solids, even while eating,
sleeping and walking. Still, he had never even heard of paramärtha, the ultimate
spiritual destination—pure devotion to the Supreme Lord.

One evening, while sitting on the bank of the Gaìgä, Vrajanätha was deeply
contemplating the enumeration of the sixteen elements of nyäya by the sage
Gautama. All at once, a young student of nyäya-çästra came up to him and
enquired as follows, “Dear Nyäya-païcänana Mahäçaya, are you familiar with the
aphorisms of Nimäi Paëòita that repudiate the theory of paramäëu, the theory of
creation based upon the material atom?” 

Vrajanätha’s immediate response boomed out like the roar of a lion, “Who is this
Nimäi Paëòita? Are you referring to the son of Çré Jagannätha Miçra? Tell me
about His subtle arguments.”

The student replied, “Not so long ago, here in Navadvépa, an extraordinary
personality named Nimäi Paëòita composed a myriad of aphorisms on nyäya and with
them He succeeded in unsettling even the famous Raghunätha Çiromaëi. Since then
Nimäi Paëòita has ruled the roost as the undisputed Master amongst all stalwart
scholars of nyäya-çästra. Yet, despite His great command of nyäya, eventually He
came to view it with contempt, in fact becoming derisive of material existence
as a whole. He embraced the renounced order as a sannyäsé mendicant and roamed
far and wide, propagating the congregational chanting of harinäma. Present-day
Vaiñëavas worship Him as the Supreme Brahman, the Absolute Personality of
Godhead, and thus dedicatedly chant His Çré Gaurahari mantra. Çré
Nyäya-païcänana Mahäçaya, kindly go through his aphorisms and see what you
think.”

Impressed and enticed by this unreserved eulogy of Nimäi Paëòita’s aphorisms,
Vrajanätha began to search for them and within a short time discovered a number
of Nimäi Paëòita’s aphorisms from different scholarly sources. Out of human
nature, one automatically venerates the pre-eminent teachers of the subjects in
which one is interested. Moreover, for various reasons people generally tend to
have more esteem for great personalities after their death and, in contrast, be
even neglectful of such personalities whilst they live. Thus, it was only
natural for Vrajanätha after delving into Nimäi Paëòita’s aphorisms to develop
great deference for Him.

Acutely feeling the absence of Nimäi Paëòita, Vrajanätha would express his
feelings in prayer, “O Nimäi Paëòita! If only I had been there when you were
present, perhaps I could have gained great knowledge from you. Dear Nimäi
Paëòita! Kindly enthrone yourself in my heart. Truly, you must be the Absolute
Supreme Brahman, otherwise how could your intellect construct such extraordinary
rhetorical aphorisms? You are indeed the Golden Avatära, Çré Gaurahari! Your
philosophy and profound insight has given vision to persons blinded by
nescience. Ignorance is black and dark, which Your brilliant golden hue as Çré
Gaura Gauräìga has dissipated. You are the Supreme Lord, Çré Hari, because you
are able to steal the heart of everyone. In truth, I have lost my heart to Your
wonderful aphorisms.”

In this manner, devotional feelings were gathering momentum within Vrajanätha’s
heart. Afflicted at times to frenzy with deeply felt emotion, he would cry out
aloud, “Hey Nimäi Paëòita! O Gaurahari! Please be merciful to me. When will I be
capable of composing aphorisms such as Yours? With a little grace from You, I
would be sure to make huge strides in my study of nyäya and become a great
scholar!”

One day, Vrajanätha mused, “In all probability those devotees who worship Çré
Gaurahari, they, like me, must have been attracted to Nimäi Paëòita because of
His unsurpassable erudition in the logic and rhetoric of the nyäya philosophy.
Let me find out what books written by Nimäi Paëòita they study.” With this mood,
Vrajanätha desired to seek the association of the devotees of Çré Gaurahari.

Repeated utterance of “Nimäi Paëòita” “Gaurahari” and other transcendental names
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the yearning to associate with Çré
Gauräìga’s followers, these two activities turned out to be extremely
spiritually fortuitous, accruing for Vrajanätha immense sukåti. One afternoon,
while sitting down to eat lunch at his grandmother’s place, Vrajanätha asked
her, “Grandma, did you ever see Çré Gaurahari?” His grandmother immediately
joyfully reminisced over her early childhood days and said, “Aha! Will I
evermore behold that nectarean golden personality, the embodiment of the most
exquisite beauty? How can anybody remain immersed in householder family life
after seeing that charming form? When He performed harinäma-saìkértana immersed
in ecstasy, even Navadvépa’s animal population, including the birds, trees and
creepers were paralysed, overwhelmed with prema. Even now, remembering those
days and feelings, my eyes fill with tears and soak my breast.”

Vrajanätha asked, “Grandma, do you have any stories about Him?” Grandmother
replied, “Yes, when He accompanied His mother Çré Çacédevé to her father’s
house, just nearby here, the older ladies of our families would cook many
different preparations of spinach, rice, and so on, to feed Him. He especially
relished every morsel of spinach, heaping praise upon the cooks.” Just at that
moment, Vrajanätha was served spinach upon his plate and thought to himself,
“Aha! The favourite spinach preparation of logician par excellence, Çré Nimäi
Paëòita,” and relished the spinach with great affection.

It is hard to describe how greatly attached Vrajanätha was now becoming to Nimäi
Paëòita on matters concerning the logic and rhetoric of the nyäya philosophy
even though Vrajanätha was, as of yet, still oblivious to pure spiritualism.
Nevertheless, Vrajanätha had become enraptured in thought of Çré Nimäi Paëòita.
He felt pleased when anyone uttered the name Nimäi and if anyone came for alms
at Vrajanätha’s door and chanted, “Jai Çacénandana!” he would be given special
care. Sometimes, Vrajanätha would visit learned Bäbäjé devotees in Mäyäpura to
hear Çré Gauräìga’s name being chanted and humbly enquire from the Bäbäjés about
the pastimes of the Lord as the most erudite scholar. 

Several months passed in this manner and gradually a certain and sure change was
coming over Vrajanätha. Vrajanätha had always been attracted to Nimäi Paëòita as
an extraordinary logician, but nowadays everything about Nimäi was of keen
interest. Vrajanätha now felt a growing ennui towards logic and rhetoric, and
very soon Nimäi the pure devotee dethroned Nimäi the logician par excellence
from Vrajanätha’s heart. At the rhythmic sounds of the kohl and karatälas,
Vrajanätha’s heart now leapt and danced in joy. Each time he saw a devotee, he
would offer obeisances very respectfully to the devotee within his mind, and he
felt increasing devotion to Çré Navadvépa-dhäma as the birthplace of Çré
Gauräìga. Steadily Vrajanätha was maturing into a spiritual and saintly person.
His competitor scholars of nyäya noticed the change and saw that Vrajanätha had
grown quiet and pensive, so they heaved a sigh of relief knowing they would be
spared harassment by his sharp arrows of logic and rhetoric. Naiyäyika Cüòämaëi
thought that his worshipful Deity had successfully disabled Vrajanätha and that
now he had finally rid himself of the last impediment to his own ascension. 

One day Vrajanätha sat upon the bank of the Gaìgä and soliloquised, “If a great
nyäya philosopher of the stature of Çré Nimäi Paëòita could turn His back on
nyäya and take up bhakti, then why should I not do the same? My entire life I
have been caught up in the vortex of nyäya and have never cared for bhakti;
therefore, I have been a stranger to spiritual life and Çré Gauräìga’s sacred
name. Nyäya took complete control of my life, so much so that my eating,
sleeping, and thinking were completely stolen. Nevertheless, now things have
reversed, I have forgotten nyäya and think only of Çré Gauräìga.

“When I see the Vaiñëavas dancing, my mind is enchanted. Yet, how can I forget
that I am the torchbearer of a prominent aristocratic and well-respected Vedic
brähmaëa family? I admire the demeanour of the Vaiñëavas, but I think I should
not adopt their conduct outwardly—to worship Çré Gauräìga in the calmness of my
heart would be better. The countenances of the Vaiñëavas living in
Khola-bhäìga-òäìgä where the Käzé broke the mådaìga drum and in Vairägé-òäìgä of
Mäyäpura exhilarate me. Especially the magnetic effect of Çré Raghunätha däsa
Bäbäjé makes me wish to stay beside him permanently and become his pupil in the
study of the bhakti-çästras.

“In the Vedas, the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad, 4.5.6, declares: 

ätmä vä are drañöavyaù çrotavyo mantavyo nididhyäsitavyaù

“‘O Maitreya! Always hear about, think about, meditate upon, and see all objects
as they are related to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul, Çré
Hari.’ 

“In this verse when the word mantavya is analysed on the basis of nyäya
philosophy, the pursuit and enquiry into Brahman realization is advised. Yet,
the word srotavyah implies striving after a goal that goes beyond Brahman
realization by hearing from a realized teacher, a clear signal of the
limitations of Brahman realization. I have spent too much time in contentious
empirical speculations. Now being tired of them, I simply want to take shelter
of the lotus feet of Çré Gaurahari. Without delay I must go and take darçana of
Çré Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé.”

The setting sun ignited the western sky immersing the scene in orange hues and a
southerly breeze stirred up the dry foliage. Flocks of birds homeward bound flew
by in formation and the stars were gradually becoming visible in the evening
sky. At this moment the Vaiñëavas of the Çréväsäìgana temple in Mäyäpura started
their sandhyä-äraté, evening worship, and kértana, congregational chanting.
Vrajanätha, arriving at the temple, went directly to the Khola-bhäìga-òäìgä area
within the temple complex and sat down on the circular raised platform around
the bakula tree, where he allowed the evening kértana to Çré Gaurahari soothe
his heart.

After kértana and äraté, the Vaiñëavas assembled under the bakula tree, coming
in twos and threes. Soon the elderly Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé walked slowly over
to the bakula tree uttering aloud, “Jaya Çacénandana, Jaya Nityänanda, Jaya
Rüpa-Sanätana, Jaya Däsa Gosvämé!” As he approached the platform and sat down,
all the Vaiñëavas offered him obeisances. Spontaneously Vrajanätha felt
compelled to prostrate himself in reverence before the aged Vaiñëava. The
elderly Bäbäjé looked down at Vrajanätha’s expressive and sincere face, embraced
him, and made him sit next to him. He asked Vrajanätha, “Who are you, my son?”

Vrajanätha replied, “I am a seeker of truth, I desire to learn from you.”

A Vaiñëava sitting close to them already knew Vrajanätha and spoke up, “This is
Vrajanätha Nyäya-païcänana, the most learned paëòita of nyäya in Navadvépa.
Lately he has developed some faith in Çacénandana, Çré Gaurahari.”

The aged Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, turning back to Vrajanätha, said with humility,
“You are a learned paëòita and we are a poor wretched fool. Further, you are a
resident of this holiest of holy lands, the birthplace of our beloved Çré
Çacénandana, so we are dependent upon your mercy. What instruction and knowledge
could we possibly impart unto you? Kindly be gracious and teach us about the
pastimes of your Çré Gauräìga and in this way satiate our parched heart, which
is yearning for the nectar of Çré Gaurahari.”

As Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé and Vrajanätha conversed in this way, the other
Vaiñëavas gradually dispersed and went to perform their particular services.
Soon only Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé and Vrajanätha remained seated under the bakula
tree. Vrajanätha said, “Respected Holiness, by birth we are brähmaëas and are
very proud of our pedantry. High birth and education have made us insolent and
so we look down upon the world with snobbish disdain. We do not know how to
respect spiritual preceptors and saintly persons. It is beyond me how and by
what good fortune I have learned to admire and respect your personage and
activities. Kindly answer a few queries of mine. I have come not to challenge,
but to submit and become enlightened.” 

Vrajanätha then asked with deep sincerity, “Kindly tell me what is the highest
sädhya, ultimate goal, and sädhana, means to attain that ultimate goal, for the
jéva. As a student of the nyäya philosophy, I have scrutinized the nyäya-çästras
and concluded that by constitution the jéva is eternally different and separate
from Éçvara. Further, the mercy of Éçvara is the sole means by which the jéva
may attain mukti. The means of obtaining this mercy is sädhana and the ultimate
reward of sädhana is called sädhya. On numerous occasions I have searched the
nyäya scriptures for a clue on these two matters and have drawn a blank. Kindly
communicate to me your understanding of these two concepts—sädhana and sädhya.”

Çré Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé was a generous and noble-minded saint. He had lived
for a long time in Çré Rädhä-kuëòa, Våndävana, as a pupil of the illustrious
Çréla Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé, who was also known as the Däsa Gosvämé. Every
afternoon he had listened to the transcendental pastimes of Çré Gauräìga
narrated by the Däsa Gosvämé himself to a small enrapt audience. There in Çré
Rädhä-kuëòa, Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé would regularly discuss transcendental
topics with Çréla Kåñëa Däsa Kaviräja Mahäçaya and when they were impeded by
doubts on a difficult esoteric point, they would go to Däsa Gosvämé for
clarification. At the present time Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé was the most learned
scholar in all Gauòa-maëòala, having come here after the disappearance of Çréla
Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé and Çréla Kåñëa Däsa Kaviräja Mahäçaya. The nectarean
discussions between him and Paramahaàsa Premadäsa Bäbäjé of Godruma on the topic
of kåñëa-prema were well known.

Vrajanätha’s question evoked an immediate response in Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé who
with great pleasure began to speak, “My dear Çré Nyäya-païcänana, any person
enquiring about sädhana and sädhya after the study of the nyäya philosophical
treatises is truly a fortunate soul, because the prime purpose of the
nyäya-çästra is to prepare the seeker of truth to analyse and compile the
knowledge of sädhana and sädhya objectively and without prejudice. On the other
hand, those who study nyäya simply to become great controversial argumentators
have unfortunately succeeded in missing this central point and have thereby
acquired negative results. Their efforts are misapplied and their lives are an
exercise in futility.

“Sädhya is the tattva attained through the practice of sädhana; thus, the method
for realising sädhya is sädhana. Each jéva entrapped by mäyä sees the sädhya
objective differently—each according to his particular penchant and degree of
realization. Factually sädhya is one, not numerous, but because of variation in
the tendency and adhikära of the conditioned jévas, sädhya has been divided into
three types: bhukti, sense enjoyment; mukti, salvation; and bhakti, devotional
service.

“Persons who are engrossed in materialistic activities, solely yearning for the
material pleasures, consider bhukti as their sädhya, their goal of life. The
Vedic çästras are compared to a käma-dhenu, wish-fulfilling cow, for a soul may
obtain his desired object by following their respective prescriptions. Moreover,
with whatever motive a man turns to the scriptures, he finds his desires
sanctioned. For the materialistic person, the karma-käëòa section of the Vedas
promulgates bhukti as the sädhya. The complete range of imaginable physical
pleasures is delineated in the karma-käëòa scriptures. The bewildered jéva
engaged within the tabernacle of the material body craves especially for the
delights of the flesh and the material world has been created to facilitate this
desired sense gratification.

“The sensual pleasures a man experiences from the birth ‘till the death of this
body are known as aihika-sukha, the worldly pleasures of this present life. When
referring to the pleasures of the next life, after death, the enjoyment is
called ämutrika-sukha, of which there are many kinds: In the heavenly abodes of
Lord Indra one sees the dancing of the beautiful apsaräs, courtesans; drinks the
nectar of immortality; smells the fragrance of celestial flowers in the
Nandana-känana gardens; beholds the splendour of the Indrapuré palaces and
landscapes; listens to the scintillating singing and music of the gandharvas;
cohabits with the damsels called vidyädharé; and so on. These are the pleasures
in the paradise of Indraloka.

“Ascending above Indraloka are the even higher planetary systems known as
Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka, and Brahmaloka. Corresponding to this ascension,
the çästric descriptions of sensual pleasure similar to that of Indraloka in
these planetary systems become scantier. In contrast to those heavenly planets,
here on earth, known as Bhürloka, sense enjoyment is on an extremely gross
level, for the higher one rises into the different celestial realms, the subtler
are the senses and their objects, the sensual pleasures. That is the only
distinction between all these realms; otherwise, throughout all the planetary
systems, the varieties of pleasure are ultimately just material sensuality. None
of them can offer actual cit-sukha, transcendental bliss, but only material
happiness, which is experienced on the mental platform by the subtle body of
mind, intelligence, and false ego as an ephemeral exultation. Bhukti comprises
of these mental and physical forms of titillation.

“Caught in the intricate maze of karmic reactions, the karmic activities adopted
by a sensual person are his sädhana to fulfil his desire for bhukti. The Yajur
Veda, 2.5.5, states: 

svarga-kämo ‘çvamedhaà yajeta 

“‘Persons who desire to enjoy the sensual pleasures of the heavenly planets must
perform the açvamedha-yajïa, horse sacrifice.’

“The karma-käëòa section of the Vedas recommends many other sädhanas catering to
the cravings of man for bhukti; for example: agniñöoma, oblations offered to a
class of devatäs known as viïvadeva-bali; iñöäpürta, the digging of wells,
construction of temples, and performing similar works for the benefit of society
in general; darça-paurëamäsé, rituals performed on the days of the new and full
moon. All these rites and ceremonies aim at attaining benedictions from the
devas for the sädhya of sensual enjoyment either in this life or the next.

“For the person with strong sensual desires, sense gratification is his sädhya.
However, there is a smaller population who feel plagued and punished by the
miseries of material existence and thus consider the fourteen planetary systems
of the material creation as insignificant and merely an arena for insignificant
transitory sensual pleasures. These souls desire to break free from karmic
entanglement. In their opinion mukti alone is the sädhya. Further, they see
bhukti as an unwanted material enthralment and bhukti-sädhana as a process aimed
at those who, being incapable of giving up their self-indulgent sensual
proclivities, seek misguided solace and approval for their materialistic desires
in the karma-käëòa section of the Vedic scriptures. 

“On this point the principal scriptures like the Bhagavad-gétä, 9.21, agree,
stating:

te taà bhuktvä svarga-lokaà viçälaà
kñéëe puëye martya-lokaà viçanti

“‘When they have thus enjoyed heavenly sense pleasure, they return to this
mortal planet again.’

“From this verse, we understand unequivocally that bhukti is not permanent, but
transitory. The fruits of bhukti-sädhana are destined to be depleted and are
therefore indeed mundane and not spiritual. Of course, the actual sädhana of
Man, his real responsibility, is to pursue the permanent. Mukti is eternal,
hence the seeker of liberation sees mukti as unquestionably the true sädhya of
Man. In order to achieve this goal of mukti, the salvationist considers the four
sädhanas enumerated in the scriptures for this particular sädhya as the only
real and desirable sädhanas. Known as the sädhana-catuñöaya, the four are
nitya-anitya-vastu viveka, discriminating between eternal and temporary objects;
iha-amutra-phala-bhoga viräga, renouncing enjoyment of the fruits of this world
and the next; çama-damädi ñaö-guëa, developing six qualities, such as control of
the mind and senses; and mumukña, cultivating the desire for liberation. 

“The Vedas, like the wish-fulfilling kämadhenu cow, provide various and
appropriate arrangements for the jévas to perform activities suitable to their
desires and particular level of consciousness. Thus, the jïäna-käëòa section of
the Vedas has postulated the sädhya-sädhana theory in terms attractive to the
salvationist. In the view of the salvationist, if after attaining liberation,
the jéva still maintains his individual identity and separate existence, then,
so say the jïänés, this form of mukti cannot be the ultimate sädhya, which in
their opinion is to merge eternally into the existence of the Brahman.
Therefore, in the eyes of the salvationist, the highest limits of liberation
extend to nirväëa, merging eternally into Brahman. However, in actual fact the
truth is that the jévas are eternally individuals, so an option such as nirväëa
is thoroughly impossible for them to attain. The Svetäçvatara Upaniñad, 6.13,
states: 

nityo nityänäm cetanaç cetanänäm

“‘He, the Supreme Brahman, is the Supreme Eternal amongst all eternal beings,
and He is the Supreme Conscious Being amongst all conscious beings.’

“Vedic verses such as these firmly confirm the eternality of the individual
existence of the unlimited number of jévas. An eternal being can neither forgo
his identity nor terminate his existence as is proposed in the concept of
nirväëa. Those jévas who believe that even after mukti the jéva certainly
maintains his individual identity and existence reject the proposition that
bhukti or the above concept of mukti are the ultimate sädhya. They see both of
these sädhyas as imperfect and extraneous to the true nature of the jéva.

“Every human action includes both sädhya and sädhana as well as other
ingredients. Whatever goal a jéva sets for himself is sädhya, and the means used
to achieve such is known as sädhana. A little pondering over this matter will
show that the concepts of sädhya and sädhana are interrelated like the
successive links in a chain. What is now sädhya later becomes the sädhana for
the next successive goal. The ultimate link at the end of this chain is the
final sädhya, which therefore never proceeds to another sädhana. Beyond this
systematic arrangement of sädhya and sädhana as preparatory links lies the
ultimate link, bhakti.

“The highest, final and absolute sädhya is bhakti, because bhakti is the
nitya-siddha-bhäva, eternal state of perfection, of the jéva. Every human action
is a link in the long chain of the sädhya and sädhana paradigm. Many of the
links in this chain make up the chapter known as karma, which is then followed
by another set of links comprising the chapter of jïäna, after which the chapter
of bhakti begins.

“The chapter of karma claims that bhukti is the prime purpose of life, the jïäna
chapter upholds mukti as the highest, and bhakti proposes prema-bhakti.
Nevertheless, a thorough investigation into the perfected eternal state of the
jéva, reveals the irrefutable conclusion that bhakti is the ultimate sädhya and
sädhana. In the systems of karma and jïäna, sädhya and sädhana are transitory
and non-ultimate. Therefore, in the final analysis, karma and jïäna are
irrelevant and should only be accorded an intermediary status on the path
leading ultimately to the eternality of bhakti.”

Vrajanätha, “Why is bhakti not accorded everywhere in the Vedic scriptures a
pre-eminent position in spiritual science? For instance, in the Båhad-äraëyaka
Upaniñad, 4.5.15, and 2.4.24:

kena kaà paçyet 

“‘Who will perceive whom with the help of what?’

“Also, in the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad, 1.4.10: 

ahaà brahmäsmi 

“‘I, jéva soul, am of the same nature as Brahman.’

“In the Aitareya Upaniñad, 3.1.3, we find:

prajïänaà brahma

“‘Prajïä, consciousness, is transcendental, steeped in the supramundane nature
of Brahman.’

“Further, in the Chändogya Upaniñad, 6.8.7: 

tat tvam asi çvetaketo

“‘O Çvetaketu, you are that Brahman.’ 

“Therefore, where is the mistake if mukti is presented as the highest sädhya?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “I have already explained that there are different
sädhya proposed in the Vedas according to the variety of human predispositions.
As long as the yearning for bhukti is strongly alive in a person, he cannot
acknowledge even the existence of mukti. For such sensually minded persons,
there are also sufficient supportive statements in scriptures. For example the
Äpastamba Çrauta-sütra, 2.1.1, declares:

akñayaà ha vai cäturmäsya-yäjinaù

“‘Those who observe the vow of cäturmäsya obtain perpetual residence in heaven.’

“Does this then imply that the desire for mukti is reprehensible? Simply because
the bhukti obsessed karmis are unable to find any clue of mukti in the Vedas,
should it then be concluded that the Vedas are silent about mukti? In fact, the
truth is that some åñis in the subject of karma have advised those who are
obsessed with bhukti to take up the karma-käëòa performances of the Vedas,
seeing that such sensually minded persons are uninterested in and incapable of
cultivating the vairägya necessary to achieve mukti. These instructions were
compiled to help these neophytes in spiritual life to develop faith in the Vedic
prescriptions and thus the Vedas corresponding to their lower level of
consciousness. 

“Certainly, it is unproductive for the jéva, if he slides down from his present
level of consciousness. By performing Vedic duties and activities in harmony
with his particular level, he gradually and comfortably ascends to the next
higher state of consciousness. Thus the Vedas do not repudiate those
instructions that motivate persons to commit themselves even to bhukti and mukti
because such criticism would confuse and discourage the aspirants after these
lower goals and thus possibly lead them into degradation. Everyone who has
attained perfection has gone through the discipline of this gradual process of
elevation by adhering to the particular Vedic prescriptions for which he was
qualified.

“Jïäna is superior to karma as it bestows mukti. Nevertheless, the karma-käëòa
section of the Vedas extensively praises the performance of karma and refrains
from admitting the superiority of jïäna and thus the superiority of mukti over
bhukti. In the jïäna-käëòa chapter of the Vedas, knowledge of mukti has been
praised as shown by the verses already quoted. Therefore, jïäna appears there as
superior to karma. Similarly, in the relevant sections of the Vedas, bhakti is
expounded as clearly excelling jïäna and karma. 

“Statements such as tattvam asi and aham brahmäsmi eulogise brahma-nirväëa, thus
urging the salvationists to fully pledge themselves to the pursuit of
brahma-nirväëa. That is not negative, but rather meritorious. Yet, this does not
make brahma-nirväëa the ultimate perfection. The ultimate Vedic conclusion
asserts that bhakti is the purest sädhana and prema-bhakti is the highest
sädhya.”

Vrajanätha, “Is it actually possible that the mahä-väkya, pre-eminent aphorisms,
of the Vedas, that I have just quoted, present an ultimately false sädhya and
sädhana concept?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Are these Vedic edicts that you call the mahä-väkyas
really so excellent? And do they actually predominate over other Vedic
testimonies? No. Where is such an opinion upheld? Certainly, within the Vedas
themselves, these aphorisms have not been designated as mahä-väkyas. Clearly
then, the äcäryas of the path of jïäna have inventively designated these
statements as mahä-väkyas for the sole purpose of lending weight to their own
philosophy. Factually, the praëava, the seed vibration auà, is the only and
actual mahä-väkya to which all other Vedic statements are related.

“Also however it would not be exaggerated to say that every statement of the
Vedas is a mahä-väkya. To discriminate and designate one Vedic aphorism as a
mahä-väkya and the others as sämänya-väkya, ordinary, is simply mental
speculation. This bigoted provincialism is surely an offence against the Vedas.
Actually, in the relevant khaëòas, the Vedas praise karma as well as mukti and
give suitable versions of the sädhya and sädhana practice for the respective
attainment of both these goals. Yet, when the final analysis is drawn, all
arbitrations are harmonized in the conclusion that only bhakti is the true and
actual sädhya and sädhana. 

“The Vedas are said to be like a cow and Çré Nanda-nandana, the son of Nanda
Mahäräja, is the milkman who milks her. The following statement, made by Çré
Kåñëa, is an absolute conclusion, as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, 6.46-47:

tapasvibhyo ‘dhiko yogé
jïänibhyo ‘pi mato ‘dhikaù
karmibhyaç cädhiko yogé 
tasmäd yogé bhavärjuna

“‘A yogi is greater than the ascetic, greater than the empiricist, and greater
than the fruitive worker. Therefore, O Arjuna, in all circumstances, be a yogi.’

yoginäm api sarveñäà 
mad-gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà 
sa me yuktatamo mataù 

“‘And of all yogis, the one with great faith who always abides in Me, thinks of
Me within himself, and renders transcendental loving service to Me is the most
intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all.’

“The Svetäçvatara Upaniñad, 6.23, declares:

yasya deve parä bhaktir 
yathä deve tathä gurau
tasyaite kathitä hy arthäù 
prakäçante mahätmanaù 

“‘Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the
spiritual master are all the imports of the Vedic knowledge automatically
revealed.’

“In the Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad, Pürva-vibhäga 15, we find:

bhaktir asya bhajanaà tad ihämutropädhi
nairasyenaivämuñmin manasaù kalpanam
etad eva ca naiñkarmyam

“‘Devotional service to the Supreme Lord, Çré Govinda, is real bhajana. Curbing
the desires for earthly as well as heavenly sense enjoyment, absorbing the
consciousness purely in Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme Brahman, with love is indeed
unmotivated devotional service and is known as complete surrender.’

“Further, in the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad, 1.4.8, we find:

ätmänam eva priyam upäséta

“‘One must worship the Ätmä, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, knowing Him to
be very near and dear.’

“In the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad, 4.5.6, it is said:

ätmä vä are drañöavyaù çrotavyo
mantavyo nididhyäsitavyaù 

“‘O Maitreya! Always hear and think about, meditate upon, and see all objects
related to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul, Çré Hari.’

“Any person who scrutinizes these Vedic postulations will automatically draw the
obvious conclusion: The path of bhakti is the real sädhana.”

Vrajanätha, “The karma-käëòa instructs its adherents to perform bhakti with
faith to Éçvara, who bestows the results of all action. In the jïäna-käëòa,
there are the sädhana-catuñöaya, one of which is bhakti, which strives after
hari-toñaëa, satisfying Çré Hari. If bhakti is thus apparently employed in the
achievement of bhukti and mukti, how does bhakti then uphold its claim of being
the ultimate eternal goal, the highest sädhya? It is naturally assumed that
bhakti first acting as the sädhana offers bhukti and mukti and thereafter losing
its utility is abandoned. Kindly shed light upon this topic.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “It is absolutely correct that in the karma-käëòa
chapter bhakti is used as a means to obtain bhukti and in the jïäna-käëòa
chapter bhakti is employed to offer mukti. To understand this employment of
bhakti, one fact must be clearly understood: No goals or results can be achieved
if the Supreme Lord, the fountainhead of all energies, is not satisfied.
Whatever volume of energy is found in the jéva or in matter is merely a
fractional display of the potency of the Supreme Lord. Essentially neither karma
nor jïäna is able to satisfy the Supreme Lord properly and attract His
mercy—only bhakti is able to attract His mercy. Therefore, only when bhakti is
applied as a part of the karma or jïäna processes do these ultimately bhakti
dependent processes offer their specific results. Thus, the paths of karma and
jïäna harbour bhakty-äbhäsa, a mere semblance of bhakti, and not çuddha-bhakti. 

“In fact, there are two varieties of bhakty-äbhäsa: çuddha-bhakty-äbhäsa, a
semblance of pure bhakti; and viddha-bhakty-äbhäsa, a semblance of mixed bhakti.
I will describe çuddha-bhakti-äbhäsa later, but for now understand that
viddha-bhakty-äbhäsa is further subdivided into three variations: (1)
karma-viddha-bhakty-äbhäsa, a semblance of bhakti mixed with fruitive action;
(2) jïäna-viddha-bhakty-äbhäsa, a semblance of bhakti mixed with monistic
knowledge; and (3) karma-jïäna-ubhaya-viddha-bhakty-äbhäsa, a semblance of
bhakti mixed with both fruitive action and monistic knowledge. 

“A yajïa—during which invocatory prayers are made, such as, ‘O Lord Indra! O
Püñana, the sun god! Kindly grant me the results of this yajïa!’—is a
bhakty-äbhäsa performance constituted of karma-viddha-bhakty-äbhäsa. Some
spiritual authorities have termed this type of adulterated bhakti as
karma-miçra-bhakti; still others have called it äropa-siddha-bhakti, seeking
achievement through the artificial interpolation of devotion.

“Outbursts in an emotional state such as, ‘O Yadunandana, Kåñëa! I turn to you,
driven by fears of this fierce material existence! I am constantly chanting your
sacred names—Hare Kåñëa. Kindly deliver me! Give me mukti!’ or ‘O Supreme
Controller, you are the Brahman! I have fallen into this deep well of illusion,
please pick me up and allow me to merge with you!’ are examples of
jïäna-viddha-bhakti-äbhäsa. Again, some spiritual authorities have called this
type of adulterated bhakti jïäna-miçra-bhakti, devotion mixed with empirical
knowledge, or äropa-siddha-bhakti, seeking achievement through the artificial
interpolation of devotion.

“All such apparently devotional activities are very distinct from çuddha-bhakti.
The quality of bhakti described by the Supreme Lord in the çloka of the
Bhagavad-gétä, 6.47, which we have previously quoted is çuddha-bhakti: 

yoginäm api sarveñäà
mad-gatenäntarätmanä
çraddhävän bhajate yo mäà
sa me yuktatamo mataù

“‘Of all yogis, the one who with great faith always abides in Me, thinks of Me
within himself, and renders transcendental loving service to Me is the most
intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all. That is My
opinion.’ 

“This çuddha-bhakti is our sädhana; and in the perfected stage çuddha-bhakti is
transformed into prema. The two paths described as karma and jïäna are simply
related to bhukti and mukti respectively. They do not constitute the means to
guide the jéva to his highest eternal perfection, prema-bhakti.” 

At this point of the question-and-answer session, Vrajanätha seemed to have run
out of further questions. He thought within, “To faithfully examine and ponder
over these profound and subtle topics is better than subjecting them to the
tricky rhetorical analysis of nyäya dialecticism. Also, Bäbäjé Mahäräja is
obviously so proficient in all these subjects that I am sure my quest for
spiritual knowledge will be gradually satisfied by further enquiry in the
future. As the late night has now arrived, I should return home.” 

Aloud Vrajanätha then said, “Respected Bäbäjé Mahäräja, I have learnt such
wonderful truths from you today. I would very much like to visit you from time
to time and receive instructions and knowledge from you. You are a vastly
learned scholar, please be compassionate with me! Yet, kindly answer just one
more question before I leave: Has Çré Gauräìga compiled his instructions in any
book? I would like to get a copy.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Çré Caitanya Mahaprabhu has not personally written down
any of His instructions. His followers however have written volumes upon His
order. The Lord has personally given eight verses, known as the Çikñäñöaka; the
devotees cherish them as a necklace of priceless gems. They contain all His
instructions in condensed form. The advanced devotees have probed deeply into
these esoteric dictums, mining out ten fundamental eternal truths, known as the
Daça-müla. In the form of aphorisms, these ten truths wonderfully encompass and
expound the philosophy of sädhya and sädhana in the three divisions of (1)
sambandha, the philosophy of the eternal interrelationships between the Supreme
Creator and His various energies; (2) abhidheya, the means of attaining the
eternal goal; and (3) prayojana, the nature of the eternal goal itself. In the
beginning, it is best that you to comprehend these truths.”

Vrajanätha replied, “As you desire. Tomorrow night, I will come and learn from
you the Daça-müla. You are my çikñä-guru, I offer my daëòavat-praëämas unto
you.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé firmly embraced Vrajanätha and said, “My dear son, you
have sanctified the brähmaëa class. Come tomorrow and bring joy to my heart.”

Thus ends the twelfth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma: Sädhana,
the Means of Attainment, and Sädhya, the Ultimate Goal

JDH 13: Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana

Chapter Thirteen
Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana

Part One: Pramäëa, Evidence, and Prameya, Truth

The next evening Vrajanätha came and sat down upon the platform below the bakula
tree outside the Çréväsäìgana Temple. The elderly Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé had
developed a paternal affection for Vrajanätha and was actually waiting for him.
Several times, the thoughts of Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé had strayed to outside the
temple in expectancy, so when he heard Vrajanätha’s arrival, he quickly came out
of the aìgana and greeted him with an affectionate hug. Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé
then steered Vrajanätha towards his personal bhajana-kuöéra, which was at the
side of the temple courtyard surrounded by jasmine trees, and invited him to sit
down. Vrajanätha reached down and touched Bäbäjé’s feet. After taking Bäbäjé’s
footdust and smearing it upon his head, Vrajanätha felt greatly elated and said
submissively, “Respected Bäbäjé, kindly instruct me upon the Daça-müla tenets,
which contain the essence of the teachings of Nimäi Pandita, Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu.”

The heart of the religious patriarch exulted upon hearing the words of the
younger man, which revealed his sincere desire to learn. He replied, “My son, I
will now impart to you the philosophy of Daça-müla. You are a scholar, ponder
over the philosophy contained within the following verse, which presents the ten
doctrines concisely and displays their importance: 

ämnäyaù präha tattvaà harim iha paramaà sarva-çaktim rasäbdhià
tad bhinnäàsäàç ca jévän prakåti-kavalitän tad-vimuktäàç ca bhävät
bhedäbedha-prakäçaà sakalam api hareù sädhanaà çuddha-bhaktià
sädhyaà tat-prétim evety upadiçati janän gaura-candraù svayaà saù

“‘The Vedic knowledge that is received through the system of guru-paramparä,
disciplic succession, is known as ämnäya, the most authoritative and exhaustive
wisdom. The Vedas, known as the çruti, and the småti scriptures, for example the
Çrémad Bhägavatam, which are fully in line with the  çruti, are essentially
transcendental and are thus presented as the pramäëa, proof and evidence. The
directly perceivable truths propounded and evidenced by the pramäëa are
designated as the prameya. They are nine in number: (1) parama-tattva, Çré Hari
is the Supreme Absolute Truth; (2) sarva-çaktimän, Çré Hari is omnipotent; (3)
akila-rasämåta-sindhu, Çré Hari is the shoreless ocean of unlimited nectarean,
mellows; (4) vibhinnäàça-tattva, the entire range of liberated and conditioned
jévas are Çré Hari’s eternally separated parts and parcels and comprise His
jéva-çakti; (5) baddha-jéva, the conditioned jéva is infected by mäyä; (6)
mukta-jéva, the liberated jéva is free from mäyä; (7) acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva,
all creation either material or spiritual is a manifestation of Çré Hari’s
inconceivable potency, which is simultaneously different and non-different from
the Lord Himself; (8) çuddha-bhakti, bhakti is the only sädhana; and (9)
kåñëa-préti, kåñëa-prema alone is the ultimate sädhya. These nine items of
prameya plus the first item of pramäëa, the Vedas, collectively comprise the ten
items known as the Daça-müla, the ten root truths expounded by Çré Kåñëa
Caitanya.’

“The Supreme Personality of Godhead Çré Gauracandra has personally given these
ten doctrines of Daça-müla to the faithful jévas. The first of these ten
doctrines enunciated in the above introductory verse is the pramäëa-tattva and
the following nine doctrines are the prameya-tattva. Therefore, the nine items
of knowledge that are proven by the presentation of pramäëa are known as
prameya. And the evidence upon which the prameya is authoritatively established
is known as pramäëa.

“The above verse is the introductory summary of the Daça-müla doctrines. After
this verse, the first verse of the actual Daça-müla begins and describes the
various kinds of evidence. The seven following verses, that is verses second to
eighth, delineate the sambandha-tattva, the principle of eternal
interrelationships between Éçvara, the multifarious energies of Éçvara, and the
jéva. The ninth verse discusses the abhidheya-tattva, the principle of absolute
compulsory spiritual duties and the practice of those duties on the basis of
sambandha-tattva. The tenth and final verse establishes the prayojana-tattva,
the principle of indispensable necessity, that is the goal of spiritual
practice, kåñëa-prema.”

Attentively hearing this elucidation, Vrajanätha commented, “Respected Bäbäjé, I
do not have any further questions at this point. After listening to the
elaboration upon the first verse, I will present before you whatever requires
clarification.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé replied, “That is a good idea. Now hear the first main
verse, Daça-müla 1: 

svataù siddho vedo hari-dayita-vedhaù-prabhåtitaù
pramäëaà sat präptaù pramiti-viñayäàs tan-nava-vidhän
tathä-pratyäkñädi-pramiti-sahitaà sädhayati no
na yuktis tarkäkhyä praviçati tathä-çakti-rahitä

“‘The Vedic knowledge which Lord Brahmä and his disciplic succession received by
the mercy of the Supreme Lord, Çré Hari, is self-evidently perfect. This
absolutely authoritative and exhaustive knowledge establishes, with the help of
its self-effulgent and directly perceivably truths, the nine principles of
prameya-tattva. The methods of logical debate and speculation are incapable of
correctly ascertaining the inconceivable spiritual subject matter.’

Vrajanätha, “Is there any proof in the Vedas of a disciplic chain starting from
Lord Brahmä?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Yes, the Muëòaka Upaniñad, 1.1.1, states: 

brahmä devänäà prathamaù sambabhüva viçvasya kartä bhuvanasya goptä
sa brahma-vidyäà sarva-vidyä-pratiñöhäm atharväya jyeñöha-puträya präha

“‘Lord Brahmä, the creator and protector of this universe, appeared prior to any
other creature and from the lotus sprouting out of the Supreme Lord’s navel. He
initiated his eldest son Atharvä in the science of the Absolute Truth, known as
brahma-vidyä, the repository of all branches of knowledge.’

“In the same text, Muëòaka Upaniñad, 1.2.13, we find: 

yenäkñaraà puruñaà veda satyaà proväca täà tattvato brahma-vidyäm 

“‘The spiritual science brahma-vidyä, knowledge coupled with loving devotion to
the Supreme Lord that reveals the infallible Supreme Truth as directly
perceivable, is instructed to the disciple by a bona-fide spiritual master well
versed in the philosophy of Kåñëa consciousness.’

Vrajanätha, “Have you any evidence that the åñis have extracted the essence from
the Vedas and compiled it within the småti scriptures?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The crest jewel of all scriptures, the Çrémad
Bhägavatam, 11.14.3-4, states: 

kälena nañöä pralaye
väëéyaà veda-saàjïitä
mayädau brahmaëe proktä
dharmo yasyäà mad-ätmakaù

“‘The Supreme Personality of Godhead said, “O Uddhava! By the influence of time,
the transcendental sound of Vedic knowledge, which propounds the nitya-dharma
and thus inspires attachment to Me, was lost at the time of annihilation.
Therefore, when the subsequent creation took place, I spoke the Vedic knowledge
to Brahmä because I Myself am the religious principles, which are enunciated in
the Vedas.’

tena proktä sva-puträya
manave pürva-jäya sä
tato bhågv-ädayo ’gåhëan
sapta brahma-maharñayaù 

“‘Lord Brahmä later spoke this Vedic knowledge to his eldest son, Manu, and the
seven great sages headed by Bhågu Muni then accepted the same knowledge from
Manu.’”

Vrajanätha, “What was the reason for starting the system of disciplic
succession?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “In this world, many people are misled to the perverted
path of mäyävädé philosophy. If a disciplic succession and thereby a society of
devotees uncorrupted by the scourge of mäyävädé views did not exist, sat-saìga
would be a rarity. The Padma Puräëa reiterates this point: 

sampradäya-vihénä ye manträs te nisphaläù mataù 
çré-brahma-rudra-sanaka vaiñëaväù kñiti-pävanäù 

“‘Dékçä mantras received from äcäryas coming in the line of a bona fide
disciplic succession have full spiritual potency; others are impotent and cannot
give any spiritual benefit. There are four bona fide sampradäyas: the
Çré-sampradäya also known as the Lakñmé-sampradäya, the main äcärya being Çré
Rämänuja; the Brahma-sampradäya, the main äcärya being, Çré Mädhava; the
Rudra-sampradäya, the main äcärya being, Çré Viñëu Svämé; and the
Catuùsana-sampradäya, also known as the Sanaka-sampradäya, the main äcärya being
Çré Nimbärka. These four Vaiñëava sampradäyas are the liberators of this world.’

“Of these, the Brahma-sampradäya is the oldest. This unbroken chain of
successive spiritual preceptors continues ‘till this day. The foolproof process
of guru-paramparä sampradäya, the spiritual system of disciplic succession,
ensures that the knowledge and words of all the prime ancient scriptures of
yore, such as the Vedas, Vedäìga, and Vedänta, remain complete and in their
original form without interpolation or change. Hence, all the Vedic mantras
contained in the literatures of the bona fide sampradäyas are undoubtedly
authentic. In this way, the system of sampradäya is imperative and since time
immemorial has remained a most dynamic and indispensable element in the society
of saintly souls.”

Vrajanätha, “Is the sampradäya chain completely linked—an unbroken line of
äcäryas?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The names of the most prominent äcäryas, who appeared
at intervals, have been recorded in an authoritative list.”

Vrajanätha, “I am very keen to hear the names of the äcäryas in the sampradäya
of Lord Brahmä.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Then kindly listen: 

para-vyomeçvarasyäséc chiñyo brahmä jagat-patiù
tasya çiñyo närado ‘bhüd vyäsas tasyäpa çiñyatäm

“‘The disciple of the Lord of the spiritual planets, Vaikuëöha-loka, the Supreme
Godhead, Çré Näräyaëa, was Lord Brahmä, the creator of this world. Lord Brahmä’s
disciple was Çré Närada, and Çré Vyäsadeva accepted initiation to become the
disciple of Närada. 

çuko vyäsasya çiñyatvaà präpto jïänävarodhatät
vyäsäl labdho-kåñëa-dékño madhväcäryo mahä-yaçaù

“‘To arrest the propagation of impersonal empirical knowledge, Çré Sukadeva
Gosvämé became the disciple of Çré Vyäsadeva. The illustrious Çré Madhväcärya
later took initiation from Çré Vyäsadeva into the science of Kåñëa
consciousness. Çré Narahari became the twice-born disciple of Madhväcärya.

tasya çiñyo naraharis tac-chiñyo mädhavo dvijaù
akñobhyas tasya çiñyo ‘bhut tac-chiñyo jayatérthakaù

“‘Çré Mädhava Vipra was the disciple of Çré Narahari. Çré Akñobhya then became
the disciple of Mädhava Vipra. The disciple of Akñobhya was Çré Jayatértha.

tasya çiñyo jïänasindhus tasya çiñyo mahänidhiù
vidyänidhis tasya çiñyo räjendras tasya sevakaù

“‘The disciple of Çré Jayatértha was Çré Jïänasindhu. The disciple of
Jïänasindhu was Çré Mahänidhi, and Çré Vidyänidhi was the disciple of Mahänidhi.
Çré Räjendra was the devoted disciple of Çré Vidyänidhi. 

jayadharmo munis tasya çiñyo yad gaëa-madhyataù
çrémad-viñëupuré yas tu ‘bhakti-ratnävalé-kåtiù

“‘Çré Jayadharma Muni was to become the disciple of Çré Räjendra. Among the many
disciples and followers of Çré Jayadharma Muni, Çré Viñëu Puré was a prominent
äcärya and wrote the famous book Bhakti-ratnävalé. 

jayadharmasya çiñyo ‘bhüd brähmaëaù puruñottamaù
vyäsa-térthas tasya çiñyo yaç cakre’viñëu-saàhitaà

“‘The disciple of Çré Jayadharma Muni was Çré Brahmaëya Puruñottama whose
disciple was Çré Vyäsa-tértha who composed the treatise Viñëu-saàhitäà. 

çrémäl lakñmépatis tasya çiñyo bhakti-rasäçrayaù
tasya çiñyo mädhavendro yad-dharmo ‘yaà pravartitaù

“‘Çré Vyäsa-tértha’s disciple was Çré Lakñmépati and Çré Mädhavendra Puré, an
embodiment of devotional rasa, became his disciple. The science of pure
devotional service was propagated by Çréla Mädhavendra Puré.’”

Vrajanätha, “In the first Daça-müla çloka, the Vedas are declared as the only
pramäëa. Pratyakña-paramaà, the evidence from direct perception, has been
relegated to the position of being a subordinate pramäëa of the Vedas. However,
in the philosophical schools of nyäya and säìkhya, etc., there is a larger group
of pramäëas. Even the followers of the Puräëas have enumerated at least eight
pramäëas: pratyakña, direct perception; anumäna, inference; upamäna, analogy;
çabda, knowledge revealed through sound; aitihya, traditional knowledge;
anupalabdhe, knowledge deduced from the non-perceived; arthapatti, derivative
knowledge; and sambhava, probability.

“Why are there conflicting views on this point? Furthermore, if pratyakña,
direct perception, and anumäna, inference, are not acknowledged as principal
pramäëas, how is knowledge to be communicated and perceived? Kindly make me
understand this point.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Pratyakña, anumäna, etc., are sentient pramäëas,
entirely dependent upon sense perception. However, the senses of the jéva are
imperfect because of the four innate shortcomings: bhrama, the tendency to be
illusioned; pramäda, the tendency to make mistakes because of illusion and
inattention; vipralipsä, the tendency to cheat; and karaëäpäöava, the
limitations of inadequate and imperfect senses. 

“Consequently, how can knowledge or information, communicated through these
imperfect senses, be accurate and authentic? It is, however, the great spiritual
preceptors and wise sages deeply absorbed in meditation that have received the
absolutely perfect knowledge in the form of the Vedas, revealed to them by the
omnipotent and fully independent Supreme Godhead, who personally appeared in
their hearts. In this way, this flawless knowledge is accepted from the Lord
without the disturbances caused by the limitations of the material senses.”

Vrajanätha, “Please explain the four human failings you have just mentioned, in
detail.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The inadequate sense organs of the jéva sometimes have
fallacious, illusory perceptions upon coming into contact with matter, these
misconceptions are known as bhrama. For example, the eye mistakes a mirage in a
desert for water. 

“Further, the mundane intelligence of the jéva is limited by nature. Therefore,
he draws mistaken, erroneous conclusions if he attempts to probe the unlimited
potencies of the Supreme Lord. For example, in the matter of the Lord’s supreme
dominion, the jéva enquires with an intelligence restricted by the mundane
concepts of time and space and therefore draws mistaken conclusions. These
mistakes of inadvertence are called pramäda. 

“Doubts, suspicion, reluctance to believe, and cheating constitute vipralipsä. 

“Finally, the physical senses are incompetent and imperfect, and wrong decisions
are often made because of the erroneous and limited information received from
them in certain circumstances. This is called karaëäpäöava.”

Vrajanätha, “Does this mean that pratyakña and the other related pramäëas, such
as anumäna, have no relevance?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Is the cultivation of material, empirical knowledge
available with any means other than pratyakña, etc? In understanding the
spiritual world, however, pratyakña is impotent. The Vedas are the only
evidence, which is qualified for transcendental topics. If knowledge acquired
through the evidences of pratyakña, anumäna, etc., correspond with the perfect
teachings of the Vedas, then of course we are duty-bound to accept such
evidences. Consequently the self-perfected Vedas, supported by the subordinate
pratyakña evidences, are the only true evidence.” 

Vrajanätha, “Are scriptures such as the Bhagavad-gétä, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and so
on, not true evidences?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Bhagavad-gétä was directly spoken by the Supreme
Lord Çré Kåñëa, therefore it is as good as the Vedas and thus it has been named
the Gétopaniñad. Similarly, the doctrines of the Daça-müla were spoken by the
Supreme Lord Çré Caitanya so they also are as good as the Vedas. The essence of
the vast Vedas is summarised and compiled in the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, making this
book the epitome of all evidences. As far as the teachings of the other småti
scriptures are in pursuance of the Vedic tenets, they are also pramäëa. 

“The Tantra scriptures are of three categories: sattvika, in goodness; räjasika,
in passion; and tämasika, in ignorance. The Païcarätra treatises are sattvika.
The Sanskrit root ‘tan’ means to diffuse, and since the sattvika-tantras diffuse
the secret Vedic truths they are also accepted as pramäëa.”

Vrajanätha, “The Vedas comprise innumerable texts. Which are bona fide and which
not? Kindly tell me.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “In the course of time many unscrupulous men have
interpolated chapters; maëòalas, sections; and mantras into the Vedas for
self-interested reasons. A Vedic text may be discovered somewhere, but that does
not mean that all parts of the book are authentic. Texts that have been
authenticated through the ages by the äcäryas of the bona fide sampradäyas are
the Vedas. Sections or even entire books rejected by these authorities are
unacceptable to us.”

Vrajanätha, “Which Vedic literatures have been accepted by the äcäryas?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “There are eleven Upaniñads which are sattvika: the Éça,
Kena, Kaöha, Praçna, Muëòaka, Mäëòükya, Taittiréya, Aitareya, Chändogya,
Båhad-äraëyaka, and Çvetäçvatara. 

“A few Täpanés, extremely helpful with Deity worship, and so on, are also
included. They are the Gopäla-täpany-upaniñad, Nåsiàha-täpanéyopaniñad, etc.

“Corollary literature of the Åg, Säma, Yajur, and Atharva Vedas are also bona
fide. They are dissertations on the Vedas, known as the Brähmaëas, Maëòalas,
etc. All these scriptures have been authorized by the previous äcäryas and are
thus accepted as pramäëas, having been authenticated by the liberated souls.” 

Vrajanätha, “What is the proof that logic and rhetoric have no jurisdiction in
the realm of spirituality?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Here are quotes from the scriptures, listen to them in
the Kaöha Upaniñad, 1.2.9: 

naiñä tarkeëa matir äpaneyä proktänyenaiva su-jïänäya preñöha 

“‘O Naciketa! Now you have attained the transcendental consciousness of
self-knowledge do not squander it through the tarka, logic, of dry empirical
debates.’

“Here is an outstanding quote from the Vedas, giving further proof,
Brahma-sütra, 2.1.11:

tarkäpratiñöhänät 

“‘Contentious rhetoric and empirical logic are unable to extract the correct
conclusions from the scriptures. The conclusions established through logic and
argument by one scholar today are certainly refuted and dismembered the next
day. Hence, logic and rhetoric have been disqualified.’

“That example was from the Vedänta-sütra. There is further in the Mahäbhärata,
Bhéñma-Parva, 5.22:

acintyäù khalu ye bhävä
na täàs tarkeëa yojayet
prakåtibhyaù paraà yac ca
tad acintyasya lakñaëam 

“‘That which is beyond material nature and thereby outside the parameter of
sense perception is the inconceivable Absolute Truth. Therefore why attempt the
impossible and endeavour to approach it through empirical arguments?’

“This verse points out the short and limited reach of logic. The grandmaster of
the science of devotion, Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, a stalwart in spiritual
arbitration, writes in his monumental devotional work the
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, Purva 1.45:

svalpäpi rucir eva syäd 
bhakti-tattvävabodhikä
yuktis tu kevalä naiva
yad asyä apratiñöhatä 

 “‘We learn from the çabda-pramäëa of the Çrémad-Bhägavatam and other corollary
texts that ruci, taste and attraction, for the Supreme Lord is born out of many
lifetimes of pure and pious deeds. Even a minute amount of such ruci produces
the subtle sense of percipience for the transcendental science of devotion. Yet,
by merely employing dry speculative intellect, the philosophy of bhakti remains
incomprehensible, because within bhakti logic has no locus standi.’

“Truth cannot be ascertained irrefutably by mundane logic. An ancient proverb
lends support to this view, quoted in the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, Purva 1.46: 

yatnenäpädito 'py arthaù
kuçalair anumätåbhiù
abhiyuktatarair anyair
anyathaivopapädyate 

“‘An expert logician and rhetorician cleverly formulates a theory through
argument and logic. Nevertheless, soon a more proficient logician demolishes it
easily. This may happen to you. Therefore, logic and mundane rationale are
untrustworthy.’”

Vrajanätha, “Respected Bäbäjé Mahäräja, I have now properly understood that the
Vedas are the self-perfected pramäëa, whose philosophical authority is contested
by the logicians to no avail. Kindly tell me the second çloka of the Daça-müla
doctrines.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Hear the Daça Müla, second verse:

haris tv ekaà tattvaà vidhi-çiva-sureça-praëamito
yad evedaà brahma prakåti-rahitaà tat-tanu mahaù
parätmä tasyäàço jagad anugato viçva-janakaù
sa vai rädhä-känto nava-jalada-käntiç cid-udayaù

“‘The Supreme Lord, Çré Hari, who is worshiped by Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, Lord
Indra and other great personalities, is alone the One Absolute Truth. The
Brahman is impotent and impersonal, the bodily effulgence of Çré Hari.
Paramätmä, the Supersoul, the Universal Controller, who is omnipresent
throughout the material creation, is merely the partial expansion of Çré Hari.
This Supreme Personality Çré Hari is our dearest Lord, the most beloved of
Çrématé Rädhikä, the embodiment of spiritual ecstasy with a complexion that
flouts the beauty of fresh monsoon clouds.’”

Vrajanätha, “The Upaniñads have declared that Brahman is transcendental to this
material nature and is the highest Absolute Truth. Therefore, kindly explain to
me what arguments Çré Gaura-hari Caitanya has put forward to establish that
Brahman is the bodily lustre of Çré Hari.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Çré Hari is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
following statement from the Viñëu Puräëa, 6.5.47, enumerates the qualifications
of His divinity: 

aiçvaryasya samagrasya
véryasya yaçasaù çriyaù
jïäna-vairägyayoç caiva
ñaëëäà bhaga itéìganä

“‘One who possesses all these six divine and inconceivable excellences known as
bhaga to the utmost degree, namely opulence, power, fame, beauty, knowledge, and
renunciation is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, thus known as Bhagavän.’

“These six qualities are inseparably connected, like the body and its limbs.
However, which of them is the body and which of them are the limbs? ‘Body’ means
that which is the resting place of the ‘limbs.’ For example, the tree trunk is
the body and the branches, twigs and leaves are the limbs of the tree.
Similarly, the human torso is the body and the arms and legs are the limbs of
the body. Of the Lord’s qualities, unlimited beauty is the very nature of the
transcendental form of the Lord and is thus the principal quality forming the
body of which all other qualities are the extended limbs. In this way, opulence,
power, and fame become the three main limbs of the Lord’s beauty. And from this
quality of fame, the subordinate and related qualities of knowledge and
renunciation radiate as the Lord’s effulgence. Therefore, Brahman is the
brilliance of the entire creation—and of the Supreme Lord’s transcendental form.
Perception of this radiant nirvikära-brahman, that is the Supreme without
activity and transformation, bestows brahma-jïäna, spiritual knowledge, and
thereby vairägya, material renunciation, because the nirvikära-brahman is the
effulgence of the unlimitedly beautiful body and transcendental abode of the
Lord. Thus, this nirvikära-brahman, being immutable, inactive, incorporeal, and
impersonal, is in itself not the perfect absolute source, but the subordinate
attribute of the Supreme Lord. The light of the fire is not the
self-accomplished and dynamic principal source, but is solely dependent upon the
fire for its existence.” 

Vrajanätha, “On numerous occasions, descriptions of the impersonal Brahman in
the Vedas are often followed by the words, auà çäntiù, çäntiù, hariù, auà. This
sentence declares that Hari is the Supreme Divine principle. The question then
arises, Who is that personality, Hari, to whom this çloka refers?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Hari refers to the transcendental couple, Çré Rädhä and
Çré Kåñëa, who are eternally engaged in their amorous pastimes.”

Vrajanätha, “Later, I would like to delve more deeply into that topic. However,
for now kindly tell me how Paramätmä, the Universal Progenitor, is a partial
expansion of the Supreme Godhead?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Supreme Lord conducts the work of creation of this
material cosmos through the agency of two of His potencies: opulence and power.
He then enters His creation in the form of His partial expansion Çré Viñëu and
notwithstanding remains the complete whole in all respects, as is substantiated
in the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad, 5.1: 

pürëam adaù pürëam idaà
pürëät pürëam udacyate
pürëasya pürëam ädäya
pürëam evävaçiñyate 

“‘The Personality of Godhead is perfect and complete. And because He is
completely perfect all emanations from Him, such as this phenomenal world, are
perfectly equipped as a complete whole. Whatever is produced of the complete
whole is also complete in itself. And because He is the complete whole, even
though so many complete units emanate from Him, He remains the complete
balance.’

“Therefore, Çré Viñëu, pervading and controlling this material world, is the
Paramätmä and Supreme Progenitor. He manifests Himself in three forms:
Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu, Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, and Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu. The
limitless watery expanse that separates the spiritual world from the material
universe is known as the käraëa-samudra, the Causal Ocean. It is also called the
Virajä. The form of Viñëu situated within this ocean is the Käraëodakaçäyé
Viñëu, Çré Mahä Viñëu. He lies within the käraëa-samudra and glances at Mäyä,
His energy, and thus brings the material world into existence. Numerous
references to this fact are found in the scriptures: 

“In the Bhagavad-gétä, 9.10:

mayädhyakñeëa prakåtiù süyate sacaräcaram 

“‘This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunti, and is
producing all moving and non-moving beings.’

“In the Aitareya Upaniñad, 3.11:

sa aikñata tat-tejo ’såjata: 

“‘He (Çré Viñëu) saw, and His power sent forth the creation.’ 

“Further, in the Aitareya Upaniñad, 1.1.2.

sa imän lokän asåjata 

“‘The Supreme Ätmä, the Supersoul, glanced upon His own energy (Mäyä) and
created all moving and non-moving beings.’

“The potency of Çré Mahä Viñëu manifests in His glance, which impregnates and
pervades the entire material nature, and is personified in the form of
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu. The entire mass of conditioned jévas, who are
infinitesimal parts and parcels of Çré Mahä Viñëu, are also produced by His
transcendental glance, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu. Then, Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu accepts
the minuscule size of a thumb or even smaller and enters the heart of every jéva
as Paramätmä. In this form, He is known as Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu who is thus a
partial expansion of Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu. Both the jéva soul and Paramätmä, the
latter also known as Hiraëyagarbha, reside simultaneously within the heart of
the material body of the jéva like two birds upon the same branch of a tree. The
bird representing Paramätmä bestows upon the other bird, the jéva, the fruits of
his labour. In this way, the jéva tastes the results of his formative material
actions. This is confirmed in the scriptures:

“In the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad, 4.6:

dvä suparëa-sayujä sakhäyä 
samänaà våkñaà pariñasvajäte 

“‘The Supreme Lord and the individual soul are sitting in the body like two
friendly birds in a tree.’

“In the Bhagavad-gétä, 10.41-42:

yad yad vibhütimat sattvaà
çrémad ürjitam eva vä
tat tad evävagaccha tväà
mama tejo-’àça-sambhavam

“‘Know that all beautiful, glorious, and mighty creations spring from but a
spark of My splendour.’ 

atha vä bahunaitena
kià jïätena tavärjuna
viñöabhyäham idaà kåtsnam
ekäàçena sthito jagat 

“‘Yet, what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a
single fragment of Myself, I pervade and support this entire universe.’

“In this manner, the partial expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the Paramätmä, manifests Himself within the material universe as the universal
father and maintainer with but a fragment of His unlimited energy.”

Vrajanätha, “Thank you, I have now understood that Brahman is the bodily lustre
of Çré Hari and that Paramätmä is the partial expansion of Çré Hari. Now kindly
show me the scriptural evidences that Çré Hari is Çré Kåñëa.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Supreme Lord eternally manifests His two spiritual
moods simultaneously, aiçvarya, unlimited majesty and opulence, and mädhurya,
transcendental beauty and amorous sweetness. In His aiçvarya manifestation, He
is Çré Näräyaëa, Lord of the Vaikuëöha planets, and the fountainhead of all the
Viñëu expansions. In His mädhurya manifestation, He is Çré Kåñëa, embodying the
highest perfection of mädhurya. In fact, the intensity of mädhurya manifest in
Çré Kåñëa thoroughly covers any trace of His aiçvarya. In terms of philosophy,
Çré Näräyaëa and Çré Kåñëa are non-different. Yet, in the consideration of
transcendental rasa, Çré Kåñëa is the source and repository of all such rasa and
as such He is therefore the highest and most relishable amongst all spiritual
truths. The scriptures abound in verses describing His attractiveness. 

“In the Åg-Veda 1.22.164, sükta 31, we find this verse:

apaçyaà gopäm anipadyamäna 
mä ca parä ca pathibhiç carantam
sa sadhrécéù sa viñucér vasäna 
avarérvati bhuvaneñv antaù

“‘I saw a young cowherd boy, who being infallible and indestructible never falls
from His position. He moves mysteriously, sometimes He is near, sometimes He is
far away; in this manner, He moves in various ways. Sometimes, He is clothed in
many robes of silk of gorgeous hues and at other times differently dressed. In
this way, He is repeatedly appearing and disappearing in this universe pursuing
His transcendental pastimes.’

“In the Chändogya Upaniñad, 8.13, we come across this verse: 

çyämäc chavalaà prapadye
çavaläc chyämaà prapadye

“‘The multifarious energies of the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa are known as çabala.
Through the process of surrendering to Kåñëa, I find shelter in the
hlädiné-çakti, which is the quintessence of all His energies. In the divine
sanctuary of this hlädiné-çakti, I attain pure loving devotion to Çré Kåñëa, Çré
Çyämasundara.’ 

“Çabala also means gaura, golden. In that sense çyäma, kåñëa-bhajana, leads to
gaura-caitanya, consciousness of Gaura, which then leads to gaura-bhajana,
worship of Gaura, which then leads to Çyäma, Çré Kåñëa.

“The above verse describes thus the eternal spiritual activities of the
liberated souls. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 1.3.28, states: 

ete cäàça-kaläù puàsaù
kåñëas tu bhagavän svayam 

“‘All the incarnations are either plenary portions or parts of the plenary
portions of the Lord, but Çré Kåñëa is the original Supreme Personality of
Godhead.’

“The Bhagavad gétä, 7.7, explains: 

mattaù parataraà nänyat 
kiïcid asti dhanaïjaya. 

“‘O conqueror of wealth, there is no truth superior to Me.’

“In the Gopäla-täpany-upaniñad, Purva 21, we read: 

eko vaçé sarva-gaù kåñëa éòyaù 
eko ‘pi san bahudhä yo ‘vabhäti 

“‘Çré Kåñëa is the only Supreme Personality who can bring every being under His
sway. He is the Absolute Brahman, omnipresent and without a second, and the
Divine Object of the worship of everyone. Although He is singular, yet by the
power of His inconceivable potency He manifests Himself in a myriad of forms and
thus performs unlimited variegated pastimes.’

Vrajanätha, “Çré Kåñëa possesses madhya-makara, a medium sized form.. So how can
He be sarvagaù, all pervasive? If we accept the fact that He has a form, it
automatically presupposes that He is restricted to one place. This reveals
certain philosophical discrepancies. Firstly, if through having form He is
restricted to one place this inhibits His potency of being omnipresent.
Secondly, by having a body He would be forced to be under the subjugation of the
three material modes and thereby His absolute freedom and authority would be
impinged upon. How can these contradictions be reconciled?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “My son, you have allowed yourself to be trapped by
mundane logic and rationalisation, so doubts cloud your mind. As long as the
intelligence is encaged by the three material modes, it cannot properly perceive
çuddha-sattva, pure goodness. Yet, in its vain attempt to do so, it merely
interpolates the gross dimensions upon the spiritual platform of çuddha-sattva
and finally constructs a material picture. Intimidated by this overbearing and
confounding concoction of the material mind, the material intelligence then
seeks escape into the impersonal conception of monistic Brahman. Unfortunately,
if this reaction becomes fixed, it closes the doors to perception and
realization of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 

“However, when we understand that the human-like appearance of the Supreme Lord
is completely spiritual, then the discrepancies mentioned by you are done away
with. Niräkära, formlessness, nirvikära, immutability, niñkriya, inactivity, and
so on actually indicate the transcendental nature of Kåñëa’s form, which
comprises of a spiritual status inherently distinct from the qualities of the
perceivable material creation. Therefore, these terms may be taken as
retrospectively indicating spiritual qualities through negation. Juxtaposed with
them, however, are positive descriptions of Kåñëa’s excellences, such as a
bright and beaming face, eyes like lotus petals, the cooling sanctuary of His
lotus feet, exquisite and graceful limbs, and so on. Thus, a spiritual form in
pure goodness is described. The madhya-makara human-like form of Kåñëa is the
embodiment of both kinds of characteristics—form and all-pervasiveness—and is
supremely exquisite.

“In the Närada Païcarätra we come across this statement: 

nirdoña pürëa guëa grahätmä tantre
niçcetanätmäka-çaréra-guëais ca hénaù
änanda-mätra-kara-päda-mukhodarädiù
sarvatra ca svagata-bheda-vivarjitätmä

“‘The Supreme Personality of Godhead possesses a perfect, omniscient,
transcendental form. The Lord’s body is not material—without consciousness and
experiencing the three stages of birth, maintenance and destruction. In fact,
His body is saturated with divine consciousness, devoid of mundane qualities,
supramundane, and infused with spiritual bliss—all the parts and limbs of His
body are blissful. His body is free from the duality that distinguishes the body
from the self, the qualities from the person—it is fully spiritual,
non-different from Him.’

“The purport of this verse is that the form of Çré Kåñëa is eternal, full of
knowledge and bliss. His form is not tainted by any material qualities, nor does
it have even the slightest in common with matter. It is beyond the touch of
material time, place and circumstance. Çré Kåñëa is present in fullness
everywhere, simultaneously. He is the indivisible embodiment of non-dual
absolute knowledge. In the transcendental world all the inherent qualities are
limitless, so within the madhya-makara spiritual form of Çré Krsna the quality
of sarvagaù can nicely reside even though such a quality certainly cannot exist
in a middle-sized item of the material world. Furthermore, unlike all material
form, the spiritual body of Çré Kåñëa is omnipresent, even upon the mundane
material level. This is the inconceivable mystic potency of the sat-cit-änanda
vigraha form of the Lord.

“Is this same inconceivable mystic potency exhibited in the conception the
all-pervading impersonal Brahman? Material nature is obedient to the limits of
time, place and circumstance. When an entity—who is by nature actually outside
the scope of time and place—is equated with the all-encompassing yet limited
material space, then what extraordinary transcendental qualities are being
properly evoked? 

“The Chändogya Upaniñad states that the eternal abode of Çré Kåñëa, Vraja, is
known as Brahma-pura. It is absolute, fully transcendental and endowed with
unlimited spiritual variegatedness. Everything there is dynamic and spiritual,
such as the paraphernalia, earth, water, all the elements, rivers, trees, the
sky, sun, moon, stars, and so on. All material discrepancies are absent and
Brahma-pura, Vraja, is one hundred percent infused with divine bliss.

“My son! This place of Mäyäpura-Navadvépa that you reside within is also purely
transcendental. However, as there is a net of mäyä covering your perception, you
are unable to realize the innate transcendence of this place. When, by the mercy
of the saintly souls, your spiritual vision arises, then you will be able to see
this holy land as it really is. You will see that Mäyäpura and Navadvépa are
transcendental realms; then only will your stay here be realized as the
perfection of vraja-väsa, residence in Vraja.

“Who has taught you that whoever possesses a madhya-makara form is automatically
restricted by the mundane, material qualities? As long as your consciousness is
polluted by such mundane conceptions, you will be unable to realize the purely
spiritual potency of the transcendental form of the Lord, simply because it
apparently resembles the human appearance.”

Vrajanätha, “Respected Bäbäjé, the Deity form, bodily lustre, pastime
paraphernalia, associates, homes, woods, love-groves, etc., of Çré Rädhä and Çré
Kåñëa are all supramundane and the intelligent person should not have any doubts
regarding their transcendental quality. However, the question that follows is,
‘How do the incarnations of the Supreme Lord manifest their transcendental
vigrahas, forms; dhämas, abodes; and léläs, pastimes, upon the limited mundane
platform?’”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “For the all-powerful Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, nothing
is impossible and He is always engrossed in performing extraordinary activities.
He is self-willed, totally independent, and omnipotent. If He so desires, He can
easily manifest His transcendental vigrahas, dhämas, and léläs within this
material universe. How can anyone doubt this?”

Vrajanätha, “Truly, if the Supreme Lord wishes to show His purely spiritual,
self-manifest vigraha, etc., in the material world, He can easily do so.
However, when the people of this world see these manifestations they generally
see the transcendental dhäma as a part of the material topography, His
transcendental vigraha as a mortal, mutable, material body, and His esoteric,
supramundane léläs as ordinary dealings. Why? If Kåñëa has bestowed His
blessings upon the world by these spiritual manifestations, then why has he
excluded the people from developing the necessary transcendental vision to
recognise their divine sac-cid-änanda nature?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Çré Kåñëa is the proprietor of unlimited transcendental
qualities. Bhakta-vatsala, loving protectiveness and favour towards His
devotees, is one of them. Through the agency of His hlädiné-sakti, the Lord
rewards His pure devotees with the transcendental vision to directly behold His
self-manifesting spiritual vigraha. Similarly, in the hearts of His devotees the
Lord’s léläs are perceived as absolutely transcendental and glorious. However,
the senses of non-devotees are mundane as a result of their offensive and
atheistic mentality; hence, they cannot perceive the distinction between the
supramundane léläs of the Supreme Lord and ordinary historical events.”

Vrajanätha, “Yet, did Kåñëa not descend to this material world out of compassion
for the general population?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Certainly the descent of the Lord into the material
universe is actually a benediction for everyone. The pure devotees perceive the
Lord’s lélä of descent into the material world as a purely transcendental
activity, but the non-devotees do not. These sceptics see these appearance léläs
as a combination of the mystic with the material phenomena. Yet, despite of
their perverted vision, they still receive a degree of greatly beneficial sukåti
from the Lord’s manifestation, merely by the acintya-çakti, inconceivable
potency, of the pure spirit in action. As their sukåti begins to swell, these
doubtful individuals gradually gain çraddhä in the process of unalloyed
devotional service to Kåñëa. Therefore, the incarnation léläs of the Supreme
Lord are also thoroughly beneficial to the general body of humanity at large.”

Vrajanätha, “Why have the léläs of Çré Kåñëa not been presented more distinctly
within the Vedas?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Throughout, the Vedas have repeatedly sung hymns
glorifying the pastimes of Çré Kåñëa. However, in some sections the pastimes are
in the spotlight and in others they are not so prominent. Through the
abhidhä-våtti, principal meaning of a word, the descriptions are direct and
through the lakñaëä-våtti, secondary meaning of a word, the descriptions are
indirect. 

“An example of abhidhä-våtti is in the Chändogya Upaniñad: …çyämäc chavalaà
prapadye… ‘I take shelter of the multifarious energies of Çré Çyäma, Kåñëa,
which are known as çabala.’ Similarly, at the end of the Chändogya Upaniñad
direct meanings are used to describe devotional surrender, the eternity of rasa,
and the service to Çré Kåñëa of the liberated souls, each according to his own
particular intensity of rasa. Examples of lakñaëä-våtti are in the treatises of
the munis, Yäjïavalkya, Gärgé, and Maitreya, which begin with toned-down
indirect inferences to the qualities of Çré Kåñëa. However, at the end of these
treatises, the narratives prominently describe and establish the spiritual
superiority of Çré Kåñëa’s qualities, which had been dealt with indirectly
earlier in the text. 

“In certain sections, the Vedas have chosen the anvaya-paddhati, direct method,
to broadcast the eternal léläs of the Supreme Lord, and in many places they have
reverted to the vyatireka-paddhati, indirect or inferential method, and thus
glorified Brahman and Paramätmä. After all, the Vedic scriptures are spoken
simply to describe Çré Kåñëa and His supreme excellences.”

Vrajanätha, “Revered Bäbäjé! I have no further doubts that Çré Hari is the
Supreme Absolute Truth. Nonetheless, what is the position of the other
worshipable personages such as Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, Indra, Sürya, Gaëeça, and
the other devas? Many brähmaëas believe that Lord Çiva is the highest concept of
Brahman. I, born in such a brähmaëa caste family, have heard this opinion since
my childhood and have been repeating the same. Kindly explain the hidden truth
interred in these differing views.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Please pay attention to this delineation of the
different qualities inherent in the ordinary jévas, the worshipable devas and
devés, and the Supreme Lord Himself. The excellences of Çré Kåñëa set the
standard by which the gradation of the other personalities is ascertained.
Unequivocally, the following verses from the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, 1st Wave,
11-12.14-18, establish the superiority of Çré Kåñëa: 

ayaà netä su-ramyäìgaù
sarva-sal-lakñaëänvitaù
ruciras tejasä yukto
baléyän vayasänvitaù

“‘Kåñëa, the Supreme Hero, has (1) the most beautiful transcendental body. This
body possesses (2) all good features. It is (3) radiantly beautiful and very
pleasing to the eyes. His body is (4) courageously powerful, (5) strong and (6)
youthful.’

vividhädbhuta-bhäñä-vit
satya-väkyaù priyaà-vadaù
vävadükaù su-päëòityo
buddhimän pratibhänvitaù

“‘Kåñëa is (7) the most expert linguist of all wonderful languages. He is (8) a
truthful and (9) very pleasing and charming speaker. He is (10) eloquent, and He
is (11) very wise, (12) a learned scholar, and (13) a resourceful genius.’

vidagdhaç caturo dakñaù
kåta-jïaù su-dåòha-vrataù
deça-käla-supätra-jïaù
çästra-cakñuù çucir vaçé

“‘Kåñëa is (14) very expert in the artistic enjoyment of mellows. He is (15)
highly cunning, (16) expert, (17) grateful, and (18) firmly determined in His
vows. He (19) astutely knows how to deal according to time, place, person and
country, and (20) He sees through the scriptures and authoritative books. He is
(21) very clean and pure and (22) self-controlled, a master of the senses.’

sthiro däntaù kñamä-çélo 
gambhéro dhåtimän samaù
vadänyo dhärmikaù çüraù
karuëo mänya-mäna-kåt

“‘Çré Kåñëa is (23) steady, (24) His senses are controlled in forbearance, and
He is (25) forgiving, (26) grave and (27) self-satisfied and calm. He is also
(28) equal to all. Moreover, He is (29) magnanimous, (30) virtuous and
religious, (31) chivalrous, and (32) compassionate and kind. He is (33) always
respectful to worthy people.’

dakñiëo vinayé hrémän
çaraëägata-pälakaù
sukhé bhakta-suhåt prema-
vaçyaù sarva-çubhaì-karaù

“‘Kåñëa is (34) very simple and liberal, (35) humble and modest, (36) shy and
bashful, and (37) the protector of the surrendered souls. He is (38) very happy
and (39) always the well-wisher of His devotees. He is (40) submissive to prema
and (41) the all-auspicious benefactor of all.’

pratäpé kértimän rakta-
lokaù sädhu-samäçrayaù
näré-gaëa-manohäré
sarvärädhyaù samåddhimän

“‘Kåñëa is (42) very influential and (43) most famous, and He (44) is the
beloved object of attachment for everyone. He is (45) the shelter of the good
and the virtuous. He is (46) attractive to the minds of women and (47)
worshipable by everyone. He is (48) very, very rich and opulent.’

varéyän éçvaraç ceti
guëäs tasyänukértitäù
samudrä iva païcäçad
durvigähä harer amé

“‘Kåñëa is (49) superior to all, and (50) always glorified as the Supreme
Controller. All the previously mentioned fifty transcendental qualities are in
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, to an extent as deep as the
ocean. In other words, the opulence of Çré Kåñëa is difficult to fully
comprehend.’

jéveñv ete vasanto ’pi
bindu-bindutayä kvacit
paripürëatayä bhänti
tatraiva puruñottame

“‘In the jévas these fifty qualities are sometimes exhibited as small drops, but
only in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, are they fully exhibited
as an unlimited ocean.’ 

atha païca-guëä ye syur
aàçena giriçädiñu

“‘Apart from these fifty qualities, there are another five qualities found in
the Supreme Personality of Godhead that are also partially present in the
highest devas like Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, but not in the ordinary jévas.’

adä svarüpa-sampräptaù
sarva-jïo nitya-nütanaù
sac-cid-änanda-sändräìgaù
sarva-siddhi-niñevitaù

“‘These qualities are (51) the Lord is always situated in His original position,
(52) He is omniscient, (53) He is always fresh and youthful, (54) He is the
concentrated form of eternity, knowledge and bliss, and (55) He is the possessor
of all mystic perfection.’

athocyante guëäù païca
ye lakñméçädi-vartinaù
avicintya-mahä-çaktiù
koöi-brahmäëòa-vigrahaù

avatärävalé-béjaà
hatäri-gati-däyakaù
ätmäräma-gaëäkarñéty
amé kåñëe kilädbhutäù

“‘There are another five qualities, which are manifest in the Vaikuëöha planets
by Çré Näräyaëa, the Lord of Lakñmé. These qualities are also present in Kåñëa,
but they are not present in devas like Lord Çiva or in the jévas. These five are
(56) the Lord possesses inconceivable supreme power, (57) He generates
innumerable universes from His body, (58) He is the original source of all
incarnations, (59) He bestows salvation upon the enemies He kills, and (60) He
has the ability to attract exalted persons who are ätmäräma, satisfied within
themselves. Although these qualities are present in Çré Näräyaëa, the
predominating Deity of the Vaikuëöha planets, they are even more wonderfully
present in Kåñëa.’

sarvädbhuta-camatkära-
lélä-kallola-väridhiù
atulya-madhura-prema-
maëòita-priya-maëòalaù

tri-jagan-mänasäkarñi-
muralé-kala-küjitaù
asamänordhva-rüpa-çré-
vismäpita-caräcaraù

“‘Apart from these sixty transcendental qualities, Çré Kåñëa has an additional
four transcendental qualities, which are not manifested even in the personality
of Çré Näräyaëa. These are (61) Kåñëa is like an ocean filled with the waves of
léläs that evoke wonder within everyone in the three worlds; (62) in His
activities of conjugal love, Kåñëa is always surrounded by His dear devotees who
possess unequalled love for Him; (63) Kåñëa attracts the minds of all the three
worlds with the melodious vibration of His flute; (64) the personal beauty and
opulence of Kåñëa are beyond compare; no one is equal to Him, and no one is
greater than Him. Thus the Personality of Godhead astonishes all living
entities, both moving and non-moving, within the three worlds. He is so
beautifully attractive that He is called Kåñëa.’

lélä premëä priyädhikyaà
mädhuryaà veëu-rüpayoù
ity asädhäraëaà proktaà
govindasya catuñöayam
evaà guëäç catur-bhedäç
catuù-ñañöir udähåtäù

“‘Above Näräyaëa, Kåñëa has four specific transcendental qualities—His wonderful
léläs, an abundance of wonderful associates who are very dear to Him [such as
the gopés], His wonderful beauty, and the wonderful vibration of His flute. Çré
Kåñëa is more exalted than the innumerable jévas and the devas like Lord Çiva.
He is even more exalted than His personal expansion Çré Näräyaëa. In all, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead has these sixty-four transcendental qualities in
unlimited fullness.’

“These sixty-four divine excellences are fully and eternally reposed in Kåñëa,
the embodiment of sac-cid-änanda. The final four qualities belong
unconditionally to Kåñëa, not even His viläsa, pastime expansions, can display
them. The first sixty qualities, without the final four, reside in full
brilliance in Çré Näräyaëa. The first fifty-five qualities, without the last
nine, are exhibited in Lord Çiva and the other devas in partial degrees. In the
ordinary living entities, the first fifty excellences glimmer to varying
extents.

“Lord Çiva, Lord Brahmä, Sürya, Gaëeça, and Indra are especially empowered by
the Supreme Lord with qualities enabling them to govern the affairs of the
material universe; hence, they are empowered incarnations of the Lord.
Nonetheless, their real position and original identities are as the eternal
servants of Çré Kåñëa. Many individuals have attained pure devotional service to
Çré Kåñëa by the mercy of these empowered servants, who are also worshipable
deities for the jévas on specific levels of spiritual progress. However, it is
recommended to worship them as part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. If these
empowered devas so desire, they can mercifully grant the jéva pure devotion to
Çré Kåñëa, and by possessing this potency to bestow pure devotion they thereby
become glorious and fit to be worshiped by all as gurus of the jévas.

“The great devotee and best of the devas Lord Çiva has a unique position and
status that makes him practically non-different from the Supreme Lord Himself.
Simply for this reason, the sympathizers of mäyävädé philosophy wrongly consider
Lord Çiva as the Supreme Brahman.”

Thus ends the thirteenth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma:
Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana, Part One: Pramäëa, Evidence, and Prameya,
Truth

JDH 14: Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana

Chapter Fourteen
Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana

Part Two: Çakti-vicära, A Description of the Potencies of Çré Kåñëa

With immense pleasure, Vrajanätha spent the next day constantly ruminating upon
the words of the elderly Bäbäjé from the previous night. Contemplating how
extraordinary the instructions of Çré Caitanya were, he felt his heart inundated
with divine nectar by their every word. The more he had listened to Raghunätha
däsa Bäbäjé, the more his thirst had grown for this nectar. He felt the
philosophy was very consistent and coherent and gave the impression of being
entirely based upon the Vedic çästra. He was disturbed to think why the general
brähmaëa society blasphemed such elevated conclusions. He feared that the
philosophical aberrations that had wormed their way into the scriptural
understandings of the brähmaëa caste stemmed from their blatant partiality for
monistic mäyävädé thought.

Such thoughts whirled around in the mind of Vrajanätha as he made his way to
Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé’s kuöéra. He offered obeisances to the sanctified
dwelling of this most elevated Vaiñëava and thereafter entered, falling
prostrate before Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé in humble submission. Glowing with joy,
Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé engulfed him with an affectionate hug and had him sit
close by. Vrajanätha was simply beside himself with eager anticipation. 

He said, “Dear master, I am anxiously waiting to hear the third verse of the
Daça-müla-çloka. Kindly convey to me its deepest significance.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé was thrilled. With ecstasy in his expression and his hair
standing on end all over his body, he started to recite the verse: 

paräkhyäyäù çakter apåthag api sa sve mahimani
sthito jiväkhyaà svam acid-abhihitaà taà tri-padikam
svatantrecchaù çaktià sakala-viñaye preraëa-paro
vikärädyaiù çünyaù parama-puruño 'sau vijayate

“‘The Supreme Lord is non-different and inseparable from His inconceivable,
absolute potencies and yet He is totally independent. He eternally embodies
unlimited, majestic grandeur. He always inspires His divine potencies, known as
the parä-çakti, consisting of the jéva-çakti, the marginal potency; the
cit-çakti, the internal spiritual potency; and the mäyä-çakti, the external
illusory potency, to engage in worthwhile activities. Yet, He, the Highest
Absolute Truth, eternally existent with full divinity, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, remains unaffected and unchanged.’

Vrajanätha, “The brähmaëa paëòitas say that when the parama-tattva, the highest
Absolute Truth, manifests Himself as Brahman, His divine potencies are
unmanifest; and when He is Éçvara, the Supreme Controller, His potencies are
manifest and dynamic. What is the Vedic conclusion upon this subject?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Supreme Absolute Truth displays His potencies in
all conditions. The Vedas, for example the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad, 6.8, state: 

na tasya käryaà karaëaà ca vidyate
na tat-samaç cäbhyadhikaç ca dåçyate
paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate
sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca

“‘The Supreme Lord never requires the assistance of material senses to
accomplish His works. He possesses neither a material body, nor material senses.
His body is one hundred percent spiritual; therefore, His physical presence is
not limited as that of a material body. He is omnipresent, His beautiful
spiritual form is present everywhere within the creation; simultaneously, He is
in is own abode, Goloka Våndävana, His beauty blossoming in fresh youthfulness,
dallying with the gopés in eternal pastimes. Nothing or no one is either equal
to, or greater than He is; He is replete with acintya-çakti, inconceivable
potency. His potency is known as inconceivable, because the human intellect is
unable to fathom it. Para-çakti, the Supreme Absolute potency, is another
designation for the acintya-çakti. Although His inherent, internal
acintya-çakti, para-çakti, is one, it is nevertheless manifest in manifold
magnificence as jïäna, also known as cit and saàvit, the potency of cognisance;
bala, also known as sat and sandhiné, the potency of power; and kriyä, also
known as änanda and hlädiné, the potency to perform dynamic variegated
activities.’ 

“The cit-çakti is described in the following verse of the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad,
1.3: 

te dhyäna-yogänugatä apaçyan devätmä-çaktim sva-gunair nigüòäm
yaù käraëäni nikhiläni täni kälätmä-yuktäny adhi tiñöhaty ekaù

“‘The sages who have realized the Absolute Truth are steeped in the samädhi of
deep meditation. In that state, they deliberate upon the transcendental
qualities of the Supreme Lord. With their own pure intellect they directly
perceive the mystical and absolute spiritual potencies of the Lord that are
non-different from the Lord Himself. These potencies arrange and initiate the
entire spectrum of universal causes and effects, the control of the jévas, the
natural phenomena, time, and activities.’

“In describing the jéva-çakti the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad, 4.5, comments: 

ajäm ekäà lohita-çukla-kåñëäà
vahvéù prajäù såjamänäà svarüpäù
ajo hy eko juñamäno’ nuçete
jahaty enäà bhukta-bhogäm ajo’nyaù

“‘The prakåti potency is the mother of much progeny—the three modes of material
nature, (sattva, white; raja, red; and tama, black), and therefrom the
twenty-four elements of this material nature. She is svarüpäù, the energy of the
Supreme Lord, and is His unborn, eternal consort and is non-different from Him.
She is being served and worshipped by another unborn personality, the
conditioned jéva, who in his ignorance considers himself the puruña, enjoyer, of
Her, prakåti, the material nature. Another unborn puruña, the jéva situated in
knowledge, renounces this false attempt to enjoy Her and thus attains
liberation.”

“The next verse is also from Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad, 4.9, and considers the
mäyä-çakti: 

chandäàsi yajïäù kratavo vratäni
bhütaà bhavyaà yac ca vedä vadanti
yasmän mäyé såjate viçvam etat
tasmiàç cänyo mäyayä sanniruddhaù

“‘The Supreme Lord, controller of mäyä, has created this material universe with
all its diversities such as the Vedas, sacrificial rituals, religious
observances, the past, present, and future (i.e. time), and so on. The Vedas
have recorded all this in every detail. The jéva is placed in this universe
where he comes into contact with mäyä and is thereby caught and imprisoned by
Her.’

“The term paräsya-çaktiù indicates that the parama-tattva in His highest
manifestation of divinity always displays an equally superlative potency. No
authoritative text has anywhere described the parama-tattva as being impotent
under any condition. When the parama-tattva exhibits His transcendentally
beautiful form, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and when He manifests
His impersonal aspect, He is Brahman. To designate the Supreme Absolute Truth as
devoid of potency would appear to stand in contradiction to His possession of
para-çakti.  Hence, çakti is most certainly also present in the formless,
unqualified Brahman.

“This supreme potency has been described in different places with different
names such as para-çakti, svarüpa-çakti, cit-çakti, antaraìga-çakti, and so on.
‘Impotent Brahman’ is a false name and a deception. It has been fictitiously
fabricated by the mäyävädés. The truth is that the ‘impersonal’ Brahman is
beyond the comprehension of mäyävädé philosophers. The Vedas, in the
Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad, 4.1, have defined saviçeña, personal, and nirviçeña,
impersonal, Brahman in the following manner:

ya eko ‘varno bahudha çakti-yogäd 
varëänekän nihitärtho dadhäti 

 “‘The Supreme Lord is the one, non-dual Absolute Truth endowed with immense
unlimited potencies equal only to Him. Although He does not have any tinge of
material qualities, He gives birth to the material modes of nature through the
agency of His multifarious potencies.’

“Further in the Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad 3.1:

ya eko jälavän éçata éçanébhiù
 sarväl lokän éçata éçanébhiù 

“‘The one Supreme Lord who is the controller of the mäyä-jäla, the gossamer net
of illusion, governs this material cosmos through His energies.’

“Now do you understand that the Supreme Absolute Truth can never be bereft of
His potencies? They are always self-manifest. These self-manifest potencies are
eternally exhibited in three dimensions as is evident from this verse,
Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad, 6.16: 

sa viñvakåd viçvavidätma-yoniù 
jïah kälakälo guëé sarva-vid yaù
pradhäna-kñetrajïa-patir-guëeçaù 
saàsära-mokña-sthiti-bandha-hetuù

“‘The Supreme Soul is the creator of this universe. He is sarvajïa, omniscient;
ätmä-yoni, the source of Himself; kälakartä, the awesome personification of
time; guëé, full of all transcendental qualities, sarvavid, the knower of
everyone; and the controller of mäyä, the pradhäna. He is kñetrajïa-pati, the
regent of the universe; and guëeça, Lord of the material modes and is beyond
their influence. He is the sole authority to keep the jéva chained to the wheel
of saàsära, to allocate his life-span, and to give him liberation.’

“Thus, the three aspects of para-çakti are easy to discern from this verse:
pradhäna indicates the mäyä-çakti; kñetrajïa indicates the jéva-çakti; and
kñetrajïa-pati indicates the cit-çakti. The false distinction of Brahman, devoid
of potency, and the Supreme Personality, with manifest potency, is a mental
concoction of the mäyävädé philosophers with no relationship to the actual
Absolute Truth. Factually, the parama-tattva is at all times sarva-çaktimän,
omnipotent and the Supreme Energetic Personality. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the majestic embodiment and controller of His divine potencies and
yet He is always the Supreme Autocrat, independent and self-willed, free to
activate His potencies as He wishes. This state of Supreme Independence is the
special glory of Himself.”

Vrajanätha, “If the Lord is always united with His potencies and everything is
done by His potencies, then He must be working by their assistance and
involvement. Therefore, how can He be called independent and self-willed?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “In the Vedänta it is stated: 

çakti-çaktimatayor abhedaù

“The çruti scriptures explain the meaning as follows: ‘The çaktimän-puruña, the
Supreme Energetic Personality, is non-different from His çakti.’ 

“Activities display the Lord’s çakti, yet His çakti is controlled by His icchä,
desire, which thereby indicates the çaktimän, possessor and controller of
potency. For example, creation, maintenance and destruction of the material
cosmos are the activities of the mäyä-çakti, His external potency. Further, His
jéva-çakti, the marginal potency, manifests the jévas. And His cit-çakti, the
internal potency, manifests the spiritual world. Directing His cit-çakti,
mäyä-çakti and jéva-çakti to perform their individual duties, He remains
nirvikära, aloof, disentangled, and eternally unaffected by such activities.”

Vrajanätha, “If the Lord acts according to His own desire, how can He said to be
nirvikära? Indeed, activities propelled by His sva-icchämaya, self-will,
presupposes vikära, transformation, in His personality.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “In relationship to the Supreme Lord, the word nirvikära
indicates that He is unaffected by mäyika-vikära, illusory material
transformations. The mäyä-çakti is but a shadow of the Lord’s svarüpa-çakti,
internal spiritual potency. Activities carried out by the mäyä-çakti are real,
but being impermanent, they are not eternal. These defects of the mäyä-çakti do
not exist in the parama-tattva. Desire for lélä is inherent in the
parama-tattva, Çré Hari, and the transformations that manifest on this basis are
cid-vaicitrya, spiritual variegatedness. These transformations are sublime
transcendental manifestations of prema—there is not the slightest trace of
imperfection in them. All these manifestations of spiritual variegatedness are
perfectly adjusted within the advaya-jïäna-bhagavän, non-differentiated,
Absolute Godhead.

“By His inconceivable potency, the Supreme Lord has the prerogative to create
this universe through the agency of His mäyä-çakti and yet His original
spiritual potency and identity still remain undivided, unaffected, and intact.
The wondrous variety of transcendental lélä has no connection with the
mäyä-çakti. However, those whose intellects are covered by mäyä misinterpret the
çästric descriptions of spiritual variety as material—much like jaundiced eyes
that see the world as yellow, or like eyes diseased by cataracts that on a sunny
day see the sun as covered by clouds.

“The purport of this point is that the mäyä-çakti is a mere shadow of the
cit-çakti, therefore the variegatedness displayed in spiritual activity is
perversely reflected into the material diversities. On the superficial external
level, both may appear to be the same, but at their core, they are diametrically
opposite. A human figure appears accurately reflected upon a mirror at first
glance, but given a closer look one sees that the limbs are on the wrong side,
and so on. Similarly, the variegatedness displayed in the spiritual world
appears similar to its material counterpart at first sight, but when scrutinized
the irrefutable differences are distinctly discernible.

“Mäyä-vaicitrya, material variety, is the perverted and corrupt reflection of
cit-vaicitrya, spiritual variety. Therefore, descriptions of these two forms of
vaicitrya may appear to be the same, but in substance, they are of two
contrasting natures. The Supreme Lord in acting upon His own desires is free
from mäyä-vikära and being the controller of the mäyä-çakti He steers Her to
perform His work.”

Vrajanätha, “To which category of Kåñëa’s çakti does Çrématé Rädhikä belong?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Çré Kåñëa is pürëa çaktimän, the supreme energetic in
His highest original form, and Çrématé Rädhikä is pürëa çakti, His supreme
energy in Her highest original form. Also, Çrématé Rädhikä may be known as
pürëa-svarüpa-çakti, the absolute embodiment of the original divine energy of
the Lord and identical with Him. For example, musk is recognizable by and
inseparable from its inherent fragrance. Similarly, fire is known by and is
inseparable from its heat. Similarly, Çrématé Rädhikä and Çré Kåñëa, relishing
their transcendental pastimes, are eternally distinct personalities, but
simultaneously non-different and inseparable. The three active
potencies—cit-çakti, jéva-çakti, and mäyä-çakti—emanate from the svarüpa-çakti.

“Another name of the cit-çakti is antaraìgä-çakti, the internal spiritual
potency, and another term for the jéva-çakti, is the taöasthä-çakti, the
marginal energy. The synonym for the mäyä-çakti is bahiraìgä-çakti, the external
energy. Although the svarüpa-çakti is one, She executes activities through these
Her three extensions. All the eternal, inherent qualities of the svarüpa-çakti
are fully manifest in the cit-çakti; they are minutely present in the
jéva-çakti; and are perversely reflected in the mäyä-çakti. 

“Svarüpa-çakti possesses three intrinsic qualities: hlädiné, the pleasure giving
potency; sandhiné, the sustaining potency; and saàvit, the potency of
cognisance. They are described in the fourth verse of the Daça-müla-çikñä: 

sa vai hilädinyäç ca praëaya-vikåter hlädana-ratas
tathä samvé-chakti-prakaöita-raho-bhäva-rasitaù
tayä çré-sändhinyä kåta-viçada-tad-dhäma-nicaye
rasämbhodhau magno vraja-rasa-viläsé vijayate

“‘Svarüpa-çakti possesses three properties: hlädiné, saàvit, and sandhiné. The
transcendental loving exchanges created by the hlädiné-çakti keep Çré Kåñëa
captivated in bliss. The sublime amorous desires flowing out of the saàvit-çakti
fan the erotic moods, rasa, of Çré Kåñëa. The spiritual realm of Çré
Våndävana-dhäma, brilliant and pure, has been manifested by the sandhiné-çakti,
as the arena for the eternal loving pastimes. In Çré Våndävana, the self-willed
Supreme Lover of Vraja, Çré Kåñëa, remains immersed in the eternal nectar of
rasa, the pastimes of divine loving mellows.’

“The purport of this verse is extremely esoteric in nature. These three
properties—hlädiné, saàvit, and sandhiné—are dynamically displayed everywhere in
the creation. Hlädiné is personified in Çrématé Rädhikä, the daughter of
Mahäräja Våñabhänu. She provides Kåñëa with complete absolute spiritual bliss.
She is the most beloved of Çré Kåñëa and epitomizes mahäbhäva, the highest mood
of ecstasy, which keeps Çré Kåñëa spellbound. She expands Herself,
käya-vyüha-svarüpa, as the añöa-sakhés, Her eight female companions. Each of
these eight companions embodies one of the eight primary bhävas, loving
spiritual emotions. Çrématé Rädhikä further expands Herself as the four
sevä-bhävas, the moods of divine service. These four moods of service are
embodied by the four different categories of sakhés, female friends and
companions. These four are priya-sakhés, very dear friends; narma-sakhés, dear
humorous friends; präëa-sakhés, friends dearer than life; and
parama-preñöha-sakhés; dearest of all friends. All these sakhés are
nitya-siddha-sakhés, eternally perfect female companions, who are permanent
residents of Vraja in the spiritual world. 

“The saàvit-çakti arranges for the different relationships amongst the residents
of Vraja. Sandhiné-çakti manifests the elements, earth, water, air, etc.; the
villages; the forests; Govardhana Hill; and all the other arenas for the
transcendental pastimes. Sandhiné-çakti also provides the various spiritual
forms of Çré Kåñëa and Çrématé Rädhikä and Their friends, companions, servants,
and cows, etc., plus all the other various paraphernalia of Their eternal
pastimes. 

“The hlädiné-çakti transforms into amorous pastimes and thereby keeps Çré Kåñëa
engrossed in sublime ecstasy. The saàvit-çakti manifests the myriads of mystical
moods and relationships, thus supplying Çré Kåñëa with constant amusement
leading to His helical participation. Çré Kåñëa playing His flute to attract the
gopés, taking the cows to graze, performing the räsa-lélä dance, etc., are
examples of activities arranged by the saàvit-çakti. The sandhiné-çakti
maintains the spiritual abode of Çré Vraja wherein Çré Kåñëa remains immersed in
the exchange of spiritual rasa. Çré Vraja is the highest and most esoteric place
of Çré Kåñëa’s pastimes.”

Vrajanätha, “Dear master, you have explained that sandhiné, saàvit, and hlädiné
are the three properties of the svarüpa-çakti and that these three properties
are minutely present in the jéva-çakti and perversely reflected in the
mäyä-çakti. I am eager to learn the details of the manner in which these three
properties are present in these two çaktis.” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “A diminutive portion of the svarüpa-çakti is present in
the jéva, therefore Her three properties are also present within the jéva in a
small quantity. The hlädiné-çakti is present in the jéva as perfect brahmänanda,
the bliss of Brahman transcendence, which is ready to be realized at any time.
The saàvit-çakti is manifested in the jéva as brahma-jïäna, knowledge of the
undifferentiated Absolute Truth, and sandhiné-çakti is manifested in the jéva as
anu-caitanya, the minute spark of the supreme consciousness. When these same
properties are projected into the mäyä-çakti on the material plane, they behave
differently because of the resultant contamination. The hlädiné-çakti is
exhibited as gross mundane pleasure, saàvit-çakti as materialistic knowledge,
and sandhiné-çakti as the fourteen planetary systems of the material creation
and the physical forms encasing the jéva.”

Vrajanätha, “How can çakti be said to be acintya, inconceivable, if every
activity she performs is subject to a hair-splitting analysis for comprehension
by the intellect.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The individual points of this subject of çakti can be
separately contemplated on, but as a whole, concerning their esoteric
interrelationships and subtle juxtapositions, the çakti of Çré Kåñëa is quite
inconceivable to the human intellect. On this material plane, conflicting and
contradictory natures cannot coexist in one place or in one person because such
contrasting natures mutually destroy one another. However, the çakti of Çré
Kåñëa is so inconceivable that the seemingly contrary emotions, nature, and
qualities of the spiritual world eternally coexist harmoniously in pristine
splendour. 

“Çré Kåñëa is simultaneously personal with a beautiful form and impersonal with
an awe-inspiring presence; both all-pervasive and embodied; inactive and
dynamically creative; unborn and born of His parents, Devaké and Vasudeva, and
Yaçodä and Nanda; the Supreme Godhead, worshiped by all, and yet a simple
cowherd boy; omniscient and yet accepting an incarnation that manifests human
emotions; with form and qualities, yet also formless and unqualified; beyond
sense perception and yet the personification of rasa; unlimited and yet limited
by performing His pastimes as incarnations; unattainable and far away, yet very
near in the heart of everyone; immutable and unconcerned, yet filled with
consternation at the anger of the gopés. There are innumerable examples of how
these apparently conflicting emotions sustain as well as accelerate the
transcendental pastimes of the Lord, be it in regard to the personality of the
Lord, His dhäma, His associates, or paraphernalia. The eternal harmony of these
opposing aspects indicates the inconceivable status of His çakti.”

Vrajanätha, “Do the Vedas subscribe to this view?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “This truth is amply supported in the Vedas, for example
in the Svetäçvatara Upaniñad, 3.79: 

apäëipädo javano grahétä paçyaty acakñuù sa çånoty akarëaù 
sa vetti vedyaà na ca tasyästi vettä tam ähur agryaà puruñaà mahäntam

“‘Although the Supreme Lord is without hands and legs, He is always in motion
and always receives every offering as He possesses a transcendental body with
limbs. He can see without eyes and hear without ears as His senses and organs
are entirely spiritual. He is the sole witness of every activity and the knower
of all that is to be known, but no one knows Him or can judge Him as He is. The
limited intellect of man cannot comprehend that He is a perfect spiritual body
composed of supramundane senses. The brahma-jïänés, those who know the Absolute
Truth, glorify Him as the most magnanimous and the fountainhead of all causes.’

“The Éçopaniñad, verse 5, states: 

tad ejati tan naijati 
tad düre tad vantike
tad antarasya sarvasya 
tad u sarvasyäsya bahyataù

“‘The Supreme Lord walks and does not walk. He is far away, yet He is very near
as well. He is within everything, and yet again He is outside of everything.’

“Further, Éçopaniñad, verse 8, states:

sa paryagäc chukram akäyam avraëam
asnäviraà çuddham apäpa-viddham
kavir manéñé paribhüù svayambhür
yäthätathyato ’rthän vyadadhäc chäçvatébhyaù samäbhyaù 

“‘That Supreme Soul is all-pervasive, pure, without mundane subtle and gross
bodies, immutable, without veins, without material designations, transcendental,
brilliantly beautiful, omniscient, unsurpassable, and self-manifest. He
personally bestows upon all eternal entities their particular natures through
the agency of His inconceivable potency.’

Vrajanätha, “Is it mentioned in the Vedas that the absolutely independent
Supreme Lord spontaneously decides to descend to this earth as an incarnation?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Yes, there are numerous examples in the Vedas. The
Talavakära, the Kena Upaniñad, describes a discussion between Umä and Lord Çiva.
Indra and the other devatäs after defeating the asuras in a fierce battle became
extremely arrogant and proud, even amongst themselves. Unannounced and quite
suddenly the Supreme Lord descended in a wondrously glorious form and asked of
the devas the reason for their pride. The Lord then gave them a single blade of
grass and asked them to destroy it by their own powers. However, to the total
amazement of all assembled, Agni, the god of fire, using all his power could not
burn the grass in the least. And then Väyu, the god of wind, completely failed
to blow the blade of grass away. Actually, none of the devas succeeded in
fulfilling the command of the Lord. Thereafter, they realized and accepted the
divine instruction of the Supreme Lord. The dazzling beauty and wonderful
prowess of the Lord enthralled them in awe.

“As in the Kena Upaniñad, 3.6:

tasmai tåëaà nidadhäv etad daheti
tad upapreyäya sarva javena tan na
çaçäka dagdhum sa tata eva nivavåte
naitad açakaà vijïätuà yad etad yakñam iti

“‘The Yakña being, the Supreme Lord, placed a blade of grass before Agni, the
god of fire, and requested him, “Show Me how you can burn this.” Agni tried all
possible means within his powers, but failed to burn it. He was ashamed and went
back to the other devas and said, “I could not comprehend who this great
personality actually is.”

“The purport of this mysterious incident is that the Supreme Lord, who is
described everywhere as captivatingly beautiful, descends at will and on the
spur of the moment to sport in pastimes with the jévas.”

Vrajanätha, “I have heard that the Supreme Lord is the endless source of rasa.
Where is this mentioned in the Vedas?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The following unequivocal statement is cited from the
Taittiréya Upaniñad, 2.7.1:

yadvaitat raso vai saù
rasaà hy eväyaà labdhvänandé bhävati
ko hy evänyät kaù präëyät
yad eña äkäça änando na syät
eña hy evänandayati

“‘The One who has been described (in the previous verse of the Upaniñad) as the
paragon of piety and merit is in truth parama-brahma, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the embodiment of rasa. Only when the jéva is able to attain Him, the
rasa svarüpa, the embodiment of spiritual mellows, can he be truly happy. Who
could breathe without the Lord giving breath? Who could be happy without the
Lord giving happiness? It is He who gives transcendental bliss.’”

Vrajanätha, “When He is rasa-svarüpa, why then can the gross materialists not
see Him?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “There are two groups of mäyä-baddha-jévas, conditioned
souls. One group are paräk, spiritually apathetic; they turn their back to Çré
Kåñëa and are attracted to matter. The other group is pratyak, spiritually
attracted; they face Çré Kåñëa and are drawn to the inner self and Çré Kåñëa.
The extroverted paräk jévas deny Çré Kåñëa and by turning their back on the Lord
are thereby deprived of beholding the sublime beauteous splendour of the Lord.
Their consciousness is projected into the material phenomena; thus, they see and
think only of matter. On the other hand, the introverted pratyak jévas are
averse to mäyä and are attracted to Çré Kåñëa, being therefore eligible to
perceive Çré Kåñëa who is the embodiment of the all-blissful spiritual mellows. 

“The Kaöhopaniñad, 2.1.1, states as follows: 

paräïci khäni vyatåëat svayam-bhüs
tasmät paräì paçyati näntar atman
kaçcid dhéraù pratyag-ätmänam aikñad
ävåtta-cakñur amåtatvam icchan

“‘Svayambhü, Lord Brahmä, has designed the senses of the jéva in such a way that
they are naturally driven outwards onto matter and hence the consciousness of
the jéva is projected externally. This extrovert inclination prevents him from
seeing the Paramätmä manifestation of the Supreme Lord within himself. Only a
meagre handful of dhéräs, introspective sages, have an intense desire to obtain
immortal nectar in the form of pure devotion to Çré Çré Rädhä Kåñëa. These
dhéräs withdraw their senses from the external sense objects and by projecting
them inwards see the Supreme Personality of Godhead who resides within.’”

Vrajanätha, “Kindly delineate in detail the embodiment of spiritual mellows, who
is described in the Vedas, Taittiréya Upaniñad, 2.7.1, with the words: 

raso vai saù rasaà hy eväyaà labdhvänandé bhavati 

“‘He Himself is rasa, the taste or mellow of a particular relationship.
Certainly one who achieves this rasa becomes änandé, filled with bliss.’”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “We come across these verses in the Gopala-tapani, Purva
13.1: 

gopa-veçaà abhräbhaà taruëaà kalpa-drumäçritam
sat-puëòaréka-nayanaà meghäbhaà vaidyutämbaram
dvi-bhujaà mauna-mudräòhyaà vana-mälinam éçvaram

“‘Behold that ever-youthful boy, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa,
dressed as a cowherd boy, with eyes like lotus petals. His complexion is that of
fresh monsoon clouds and His aura shines more dazzlingly than the lightning
bolt. He wears a brilliant golden yellow dhoti, lower garment. His two-handed
form is most exquisite; He is omniscient and a garland of wild flowers adorns
His chest. Anyone who meditates upon this wonderful form of the Lord is
immediately released from the shackles of saàsära.’

Vrajanätha, “Now, at last, I have understood the truth that Çré Kåñëa alone is
the absolute embodiment of complete perfection, eternally situated in the
spiritual realm, the omnipotent supreme shelter of all living entities, the
personification and repository of every transcendental mellow and relationship.
He is unattainable for the monistic jïänés and only partially revealed as the
Paramätmä to the mystic yogis pursuing the path of añtanga-yoga.

“Impersonal Brahman is His bodily effulgence. He is the highest worshipable
Deity, the eternal and absolutely spiritual Supreme Personality. Yet, I cannot
easily approach Him because He is transcendental to intellectual interrogation.
However, can man employ anything else besides his intellect to research these
matters, be he be either a highborn brähmaëa or a low-class caëòäla? I feel that
it is an extremely onerous task to attract His mercy.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “In the Kaöhopaniñad, 2.2.13, we find the relevant
passage once more: 

tam ätma-sthaà ye ’nupaçyanti dhéräs
teñäà çäntiù çäçvaté netareñäm

“‘Only those learned persons who can perceive the Supreme Lord, Paramätmä,
within their hearts can attain lasting happiness, not others.’

Vrajanätha, “Yes, one obtains permanent peace and joy seeing the Supreme Lord,
the Paramätmä, within one’s heart. The question is how can one see Him? That
remains a mystery.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Kaöhopaniñad, 1.2.23, states: 

näyam ätmä pravacanena labhyo
na medhayä na bahunä çrutena
yam evaiña våëute tena labhyas
tasyaiña ätmä vivåëute tanuà sväm

“‘Knowledge of the Supreme Absolute Truth is neither acquired through endless
debates, nor through a sharp intellect, nor through erudition. Yet, when the
jéva soul turns to the Supreme Lord with a mood of service and begs for His
mercy, the Lord from within reciprocates and reveals Himself to such a sincere
soul.’

“Further, the Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 10.14.29, declares: 

athäpi te deva padämbuja-dvaya-
prasäda-leçänugåhéta eva hi
jänäti tattvaà bhagavan-mahimno
na cänya eko ’pi ciraà vicinvan 

“‘O Lord! The person who is favoured by even a slight particle of the
kåpä-prasäda, divine mercy, from Your lotus feet is alone eligible to know in
truth Your Supreme Personality, which is the embodiment of eternity, absolute
knowledge, and bliss. Others may interpret the scriptures endlessly or seek You
through intellectual jugglery, but they will never succeed.’

“Dear Son, the beloved Çré Kåñëa, the Soul of all souls, is very merciful and
the most precious. He is attained neither by merely scrutinizing the scriptures,
nor by the elaborate deliberations of philosophy. Neither by being a talented
clairvoyant with an incisive intellect, nor by having many gurus will one be
crowned with success. The Lord showers His mercy and reveals His blissful form
of transcendental majesty, eternity, absolute knowledge, and bliss to one who
lovingly accepts Him as his very own. Employing this mood of abhidheya-tattva
will bring you home, back to Godhead.”

Vrajanätha, “Is the dhäma of Çré Kåñëa mentioned in the Vedas?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “There are many references in the Vedas to Kåñëa’s
dhäma, which has been described by many different names, such as Paravyoma,
Samvyoma, Brahma-gopäla-puré, Gokula, and so on. Take for instance this quote
from the Svetäçvatara Upaniñad, 4.8: 

åco akñare parame vyoman
 yasmin deva adhi viçve niñeduù
yas taà na veda kim åcä kariñyati
 ya iti tad vidus ta ime samäsate 

“‘The Supreme Being, known as akñara as ascertained in the verses of the Åg
Veda, resides in the spiritual sky known as Paravyoma. All the devas are
dependent upon this Supreme Personality of Godhead. The jévas who do not know
Him will gain nothing from studying the Vedas; yet those who through devotional
service have realized Him have been blessed with the greatest reward.’

“In the Muëòaka Upaniñad, 2.2.7, we find: 

divye brahma-pure hy eña vyomny ätmä pratiñöhitaù

“‘The Supreme Personality, whose magnanimity and majesty are famous throughout
the entire creation, resides eternally in the transcendental realm of
Paravyoma.’

“The Puruña-bodhiné Upaniñad states: 

 gokuläkhye mäthura-maëòale dve-parçve candrävalé rädhikä ca

 “‘In Gokula, a part of the Mathurä district of the spiritual sky, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead resides with Çrématé Rädhikä on one side and Çré
Candrävalé on the other.’

“Further, the Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad, 2.36, states: 

täsäà madhye säkñäd brahma gopäla-puré 

“‘Amongst all these [abodes], the residence of Çré Gopäla, Brahma-gopäla-puré,
is directly the transcendental Absolute Truth.’

 Vrajanätha, “The tantric brähmaëas consider the çakti of Lord Çiva as the
ädya-çakti. Why?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The potency of Lord Çiva is known as the mäyä-çakti.
Mäyädevé, the embodiment of the mäyä-çakti, possesses the three material modes
of sattva, räja, and tama. According to the particular material mode with which
the worshipper is predominantly conditioned, Mäyädevé is perceived. Those
brähmaëas, who are endowed with the mode of sattva, worship Mäyädevé as the
mistress of that mode with a mood of righteous sanctity. The räjasika brähmaëas,
fastened by räja-guëa, worship Mäyädevé as the mistress of räja-guëa. The
tämasika brähmaëas, as they are in tama-guëa, worship Mäyädevé as the mistress
of that mode and the goddess of darkness, known as Vidyädevé.

“Indeed, Mäyädevé is merely a transformation and a reflected image of the
svarüpa-çakti of the Supreme Lord; she is not a separate or independent çakti.
Mäyädevé is the cause of the imprisonment of the jéva and also the cause of his
release. If the jéva rejects Kåñëa, Mäyädevé ensnares him in material existence
and punishes him. If the jéva devotes himself to the service of Kåñëa, then
Mäyädevé manifests her sattva-guëa and rewards him with knowledge of Kåñëa.
Under the influence of the lower modes of the mäyä-çakti, räja and tama, the
jévas are unable to perceive the transcendental absolute embodiment of the
svarüpa-çakti, Çré Rädhikä, and thus falsely name Mäyädevé as the ädya-çakti. A
bewildered jéva, in the clutches of mäyä, is capable of elevating his
consciousness to the perception of the actual tattva only by sukåti and without
performing sukåti, he stagnates in räja and tama under false conceptions.”

Vrajanätha, “Çré Durgädevé is listed as an eternal associate of Çré Hari in the
Gokula-upäsanä. Who is this Durgädevé of Gokula?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “She is known as Yogamäyä, an expansion of the
cit-çakti, and is the fountainhead of the transformations of the various
transcendental potencies. When she is in the spiritual world, she asserts her
position as non-different from the svarüpa-çakti. However, when she expands down
to the material world she becomes Mäyädevé, the embodiment of the mäyä-çakti of
the mundane sphere. Therefore, the mäyä-çakti of the material world is but a
transformation of the yogamäyä-çakti of the spiritual world. And Mäyädevé, also
known as Durgä in the material sphere, is an expanded maidservant of Durgädevé,
the Yogamäyä of Gokula. 

“As Yogamäyä in the transcendental realm, she is the support and enhancer of the
transcendental pastimes of Çré Kåñëa, thereby she is known as
kåñëa-lélä-poñaëa-çakti. In the spiritual abode, the pärakiya-bhäva, the mood of
paramourship, exhibited by the gopés in order to fuel the transcendental desire
of Çré Kåñëa for amorous dalliance is actually composed by Yogamäyä. It is
important to understand Çrémad Bhägavatam, 10.29.1, which describes the
räsa-lélä pastimes of Çré Kåñëa:

çré-bädaräyaëir uväca

kåñëabhagavän api tä rätåéù
çäradotphulla-mallikäù
vékñya rantuà manaç cakre
yoga-mäyäm upäçritaù

“‘Çré Bädaräyaëi said, “Çré Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, full in
all opulences, yet upon seeing those autumn nights scented with blossoming
jasmine flowers, He turned His mind toward loving affairs. To fulfil His
purposes, He employed His internal potency, Yogamäyä.’

“This verse indicates that Çré Kåñëa decided to enact the rasa-lélä pastimes
under the supervision of His Yogamäyä potency. The svarüpa-çakti undertakes many
activities in the arena of cid-viläsa, transcendental pastimes, which ostensibly
are performed unknowingly in äjïäna, ignorance, but really are not. In order to
nurture the rasa-lélä pastimes these seemingly unwitting acts are instigated by
Yogamäyä.” 

Vrajanätha, “Another question referring to the concept of dhäma comes to my
mind. Please explain why the Vaiñëavas designate Navadvépa as Çrédhäma?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Çré Navadvépa-dhäma is on the same spiritual level as
Våndävana-dhäma and within Çré Navadvépa-dhäma the most sacred place is Çré
Mäyäpura, because the Çré Gokula of Vraja is manifested as the Çré Mäyäpura of
Navadvépa. Çré Mäyäpura is the mahä-yoga-péöha, the eternal abode of Çré Rädhä
and Çré Kåñëa surrounded by their eternal and intimate associates, within Çré
Navadvépa-dhäma. 

“The Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 7.9.38, narrates: …channaù kalau... ‘In Kali-yuga the
full incarnation of the Supreme Lord makes a covered appearance.’ Similarly, the
same principle is applied to Navadvépa-dhäma—in Kali-yuga Navadvépa is the
covered dhäma. In Kali-yuga there is no tértha-yatra, pilgrimage, superior to
visiting Mäyäpura. Furthermore, only those who understand the transcendental
significance of Mäyäpura are eligible to reside in Vraja-dhäma. To the
extroverted gross materialist, who cannot understand the actual spiritual
position and importance of the dhäma, Vraja and Navadvépa appear inert and
ordinary. Those jévas who are extremely fortunate acquire transcendental vision
and can see the dhäma in all her splendour.”

Vrajanätha, “Dear master, I am eager to learn further about the spiritual
significance and identity of Navadvépa-dhäma.” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Goloka, Våndävana and Çvetadvépa constitute the inner
sanctum of the paravyoma, the entire spiritual sky. In Goloka Çré Kåñëa performs
His svakéya-lélä, His married conjugal pastimes; in Våndävana Çré Kåñëa enacts
His pärakiya-lélä, His conjugal pastimes as a paramour; and Çvetadvépa is the
stage for the remaining pastimes of Çré Kåñëa. Spiritually the three abodes are
equal, so Navadvépa, a direct manifestation of Çvetadvépa, is still equal to
Våndävana in every respect. The residents of Navadvépa are immensely
fortunate—they are the associates of Çré Caitanya. On account of innumerable
pious deeds a person is promoted to reside in Navadvépa. Certain aspects of
rasa, which are not expressed in Våndävana, find their expression in Navadvépa.
Only a person who has become qualified to understand these particular rasas will
be able to perceive them.” 

Vrajanätha, “How large is Navadvépa-dhäma?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Navadvépa-dhäma is spread over thirty-two square miles
in the form of an eight-petal lotus flower. Each of the eight petals represent a
dvépa, an island. The eight islands that are represented by the eight petals of
the lotus are known as (1) Sémantadvépa, (2) Godrumadvépa, (3) Madhyadvépa, (4)
Koladvépa, (5) Åtudvépa, (6) Jahnudvépa, (7) Modadruma-dvépa, and (8)
Rudradvépa. In the middle of these eight islands is the ninth island, the
seed-vessel of the lotus, known as Antaradvépa. Çré Mäyäpura is in the centre of
this Antaradvépa. 

“Navadvépa-dhäma and especially Mäyäpura are so spiritually potent that anyone
executing sädhana there will very soon be crowned with the highest success by
the attainment of kåñëa-prema. The house of Çré Jagannätha Miçra is the nucleus
of Mäyäpura. It is the yoga-péöha, and the eternal supramundane pastimes of Çré
Gauräìga are enacted and seen there by the most fortunate souls.” 

Vrajanätha, “Is the lélä of Çré Gauräìga the work of the svarüpa-çakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The çakti that activates the lélä of Çré Gauräìga is
the same çakti that activates the lélä of Çré Kåñëa; there being absolutely no
difference between Çré Kåñëa and Çré Gauräìga. The personal diary of Çréla
Svarüpa Dämodara is quoted in the Caitanya-caritämåta, Ädi-lélä 1.5:

rädhä kåñëa-praëaya-vikåtir hlädiné çaktir asmäd
ekätmänäv api bhuvi purä deha-bhedaà gatau tau
caitanyäkhyaà prakaöam adhunä tad-dvayaà caikyam äptaà
rädhä-bhäva-dyuti-suvalitaà naumi kåñëa-svarüpam

“‘The loving affairs of Çré Çré Rädhä Kåñëa are transcendental manifestations of
the internal pleasure-giving potency of the Lord. Although Rädhä and Kåñëa are
one in Their identity, They have separated Themselves eternally. Now these two
transcendental identities have again united in the form of Çré Kåñëa Caitanya. I
bow down to Him, who has manifested Himself with the sentiment and complexion of
Çrématé Rädhäräëé although He is Çré Kåñëa Himself.’

“Çré Kåñëa and Çré Caitanya are eternally manifest and present. It is incorrect
to conclude that one comes first and other later. The statement that Çré
Caitanya had separated to become Rädhä and Kåñëa, who then united to become
again Çré Gauräìga, expresses that both these manifestations are eternal and
always present, not that one appears before the other. All the activities of the
Supreme Absolute Truth are supramundane and eternal. Any person who considers
either one of these two sets of pastimes as subordinate to the other is indeed
entirely ignorant of the truth and quite devoid of any perception of rasa.”

Vrajanätha, “Çré Gauräìga is directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead. How
should he be worshiped?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “To worship Çré Gauräìga with the gaura-mantra gives the
same result as worshiping Çré Kåñëa with the kåñëa-mantra. Worshiping Gauräìga
with the kåñëa-mantra and vice versa is also identical. Only an ignorant
illiterate and a disciple of Kali-yuga will try to find discrepancies in this.” 

Vrajanätha, “How may one find the bona fide mantra of the channaù avatära,
covered incarnation, of the Supreme Lord?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Païcarätra and Ägama scriptures have plainly given
the mantras for the proclaimed incarnations of the Lord and have also mentioned
those for the covered incarnations, but in a cryptic manner. Those with a pure
faith and an uncomplicated mind can fathom the importance of their words.”

Vrajanätha, “Does Çré Gauräìga have a consort and if so what is the method for
Their worship?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Çré Gauräìga is worshiped in two ways, depending on His
respective consort. In the sädhana-bhakti stage of arcana-märga, Deity worship
of Çré Gauräìga and Çré Viñëupriyä is in the mood of awe and reverence. In
rägänuga-bhajana, the spontaneous stage of raga-märga, Çré Gauräìga and Çré
Gadädhara Prabhu are worshiped.”

Vrajanätha, “To which category of çakti does Çré Viñëupriyä Devé of Çré Gauräìga
belong?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “In general the devotees designate Her as Bhü-çakti.
Yet, according to theological principles, She is on one hand the essence of the
hlädiné-çakti and on the other hand the full manifestation of the saàvit-çakti.
Thus, She is bhakti-svarüpiëé, the embodiment of the potency of pure devotional
service, who came to assist Çré Gauräìga in the propagation of harinäma. The
nine islands of Navadvépa represent nava-vidhä bhakti, the nine types of
devotional service; Çré Viñëupriyä Devé embodies this nava-vidhä bhakti and is
thus the mistress of the process of pure devotional service.”

Vrajanätha, “Master, then Çré Viñëupriyä may be addressed as the svarüpa-çakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Yes, most certainly. She is the essence of the
hlädiné-çakti combined with the saàvit-çakti. Is that not sufficient to make Her
the svarüpa-çakti?”

Vrajanätha, “Master, I am keen to learn the process of Deity worship and in
particular the worship of Çré Gauräìga. However, first I would like to clear up
a philosophical point. Having explained earlier that the cit-çakti, jéva-çakti,
and mäyä-çakti are the emanations of the svarüpa-çakti, again you said that
hlädiné, saàvit, and sandhiné are the three aspects of the svarüpa-çakti. Thus,
all the activities of these three aspects—hlädiné, saàvit, and sandhiné—that act
upon the three emanations—cit, jéva, and mäyä—are in fact activities of çakti.
The spiritual world, spiritual body, spiritual relationships, spiritual
pastimes, and so on, are also manifestations of çakti. How then may Çré Kåñëa,
çaktimän-puruña, the source of çakti, be identified?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Yes, my son, that is certainly a leviathan problem. It
seems you plan to end the misery of this old man with your sharp arrows of
tricky rhetoric. However, this simple question has an equally simple answer,
yet, to find a suitable candidate to comprehend the answer is most difficult.
Listen attentively, while I answer your query. 

“Certainly, the name, form, qualities, and pastimes of Çré Kåñëa convincingly
show the power of çakti at play. Nevertheless, an independent prerogative and
completely free will are not Her privileges—the Supreme Lord alone possesses
these exclusive privileges. Çré Kåñëa is self-willed and an autocrat; He is the
master and shelter of çakti. Çakti, the female counterpart of Çré Kåñëa, is
meant to be enjoyed and utilized by Him, the Supreme Enjoyer. Thus, çakti is
dependent and subservient, while Çré Kåñëa is independent and Her master. Çakti
surrounds and completely envelops the Supreme Lord and yet the Lord’s presence
is constantly dynamic and perceived by all devoted souls, because in every such
situation Kåñëa asserts Himself as the Supreme Personality, the Lord of çakti.

“The jéva is able to perceive the Supreme and Independent Lord only when he is
under the shelter of çakti and abides by Her wishes. Therefore, the conditioned
soul cannot independently penetrate the coverings of çakti and directly meet the
Supreme Lord. However, when the surrendered jéva is engaged in prema-bhakti, she
ingresses through the coverings of çakti and sees Kåñëa face to face. Bhakti is
purely saturated with çakti and is therefore female and embodied as Bhakti devé.
Bhakti devé is harmoniously devoted to the svarüpa-çakti of Çré Kåñëa and thus
provides intimations of the Supreme Lordship of Çré Kåñëa as the sole puruña.
Thus, through çuddha-bhakti the jéva may experience the virile dalliances and
dynamism of the Self-willed Çré Kåñëa.”

Vrajanätha, “A distinct entity that exists beyond the parameters of çakti would
indicate Brahman, as mentioned in the Upaniñads.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Brahman described in the Upaniñads is without will
and desireless. Whereas, Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme Person described in the
Upaniñads, is Self-willed and dynamic. Thus, the two principles are clearly
distinct from one another. Brahman is impersonal, without form; Çré Kåñëa though
separate from His çaktis is nevertheless personal and with a transcendental
form. He possesses a divine personality and the autocratic liberty to enjoy and
utilize His çaktis without restriction.

“Indeed, Çré Kåñëa and His çakti are simultaneously different and non-different
from one another. The çakti of Çré Kåñëa, which reveals Kåñëa, is also directly
Kåñëa Himself. Yet simultaneously the hlädiné-çakti of Çré Kåñëa, Çrématé
Rädhikä, asserts Herself as the consort of Kåñëa with a separate identity. Çré
Kåñëa is the worshipable Lord to be served by all and Çrématé Rädhikä, the
supreme çakti, is His maidservant. Their separate identities manifest the
distinctions in Their individual natures.”

Vrajanätha, “Independent will and the position as the Supreme Enjoyer confirm
the puruña status of Çré Kåñëa, what then is the desire of Çrématé Rädhikä?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The desire of Çrématé Rädhikä is always subordinate to
the desire of Çré Kåñëa. She has no aspiration or activity independent of Çré
Kåñëa. Çré Kåñëa alone is the master of His will and the desire to serve Kåñëa
and be obedient to His will is the desire of Çré Rädhikä. She is the
full-fledged embodiment of çakti, the ädya-çakti. And Çré Kåñëa is the puruña,
who is the Enjoyer, Lord and Fountainhead of this çakti.”

At this point, Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé became silent and contemplative, whilst
Vrajanätha felt elated beyond words. He quickly stood up, offered prostrate
obeisances, took permission to leave, and then departed for his residence in
Bilva-puñkariëé village. A gradual but definite transformation was taking root
in the consciousness of Vrajanätha. His grandmother especially took note of this
and thus in earnest she busied herself to find him a life-partner. 

Yet, Vrajanätha was not in the least concerned about all these mundane
happenings. Day and night, he now pondered deeply over the teachings of
Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé. When he had assimilated the dictums and philosophy
properly, he would gladly return to Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé at Çréväsäìgana for a
further dose of this esoteric nectar and the jubilant consumption of every word.

Thus ends the fourteenth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma:
Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana. Part Two: Çakti-vicära, A Description of the
Potencies of Çré Kåñëa

JDH 15: Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Chapter Fifteen
Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Part Three: The Jéva, the Eternal Individual Spirit Soul

Today, Vrajanätha came earlier than usual to Çréväsäìgana. The resident Bäbäjés
and Vaiñëava devotees of Godruma—Çré Premadäsa Paramahaàsa Bäbäjé, Vaiñëava
däsa, Advaita däsa and others—had also decided to come to Çréväsäìgana to
participate in the sandhyä-ärati. Arriving with the setting sun, they were now
all seated in the temple hall, where Vrajanätha was keenly observing them,
greatly attracted by their purity and thinking, “The goal of my life will be
achieved in their association.” The Godruma Vaiñëavas blessed Vrajanätha
whole-heartedly, noticing his humble manner and particularly his face, which was
lit up with devotional fervour. After the sandhyä-ärati, Vrajanätha left the
Çréväsäìgana and walked southwards with Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé to Godruma. Along
the way the elderly bäbäjé noticed the unrestrained tears streaking down the
cheeks of Vrajanätha. Touched by the feelings of tender caring love he had
developed for the young devotee, the kindly Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé asked, “My
son, why do you weep?” 

Vrajanätha turned to his master and replied softly, “Master, your wonderful
association and instructions have overwhelmed me. Material existence and family
life seem vacuous and meaningless, and I am now anxious to receive the shelter
of Çré Gauräìga’s lotus feet. My mind is feverish with one single question: Who
am I in truth, and why have I taken birth in this world?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Wonderful! Your question has sanctified my heart! When
good fortune strikes a person, this is the first query. Hear now the fifth verse
of the Daça-müla-çikñä and try to understand the purport:

sphuliìgä åddhägner iva cid-aëavo jéva-nicayä
hareù süryasyeväpåthag api tu tad-bheda-viçayäù
vaçe mäyä yasya prakåti-patir eveçvara iha
sa jévo mukto 'pi prakåti-vaça-yogyaù sva-guëataù 

“‘Out of the flames of a fire fall innumerable tiny sparks, similarly, from the
rays of the transcendental sun, Çré Hari, emanate millions of minute particles
of consciousness, the infinitesimal spirit souls, the jévas. The jéva is
non-different from the Supreme, Çré Hari, and yet simultaneously he is distinct
from Çré Hari. The eternal difference between the Supreme Lord Çré Hari and the
jéva is that the Lord is always the master and controller of the mäyä-çakti,
whereas the jéva, even in his liberated state by his very constitutional nature
is vulnerable to come under the sway of the mäyä-çakti.’”

Vrajanätha, “This is an extraordinary philosophical conclusion. I am eager to
learn the Vedic scriptural evidences supporting this view. For me the verdict of
the Supreme Lord as you have just given is sufficient, but if we can provide a
quote from, for example, the Upaniñads, then the common man is bound to accept
the truth of the Lord’s words.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “There are numerous supporting çlokas in the scriptures.
I will quote a couple, so kindly pay attention. In the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad,
2.2.20, we find:

yathägneù kñudrä visphuliìgä vyuccaranti evam 
eväsmäd ätmanaù sarväni bhütäni vyuccaranti

“‘Just as innumerable sparks cascade out of a flame, similarly, from Çré Kåñëa,
who is the Ätmä, the Universal Soul, the jévas emanate who are His separated
parts and parcels.’

“In another part of the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad, 4.3.9, we find:

tasya vä etasya puruñasya dve eva sthäne bhävata
idaà ca paraloka-sthänaà ca sandhyaà tåtéyaà
svapna-sthänam tasmin sandhye sthäne tiñöhan ete
ubhe sthäne paçyati idaà ca paraloka-sthänaà ca

“‘The jéva has access to two places, both of which he may seek, this material
world and the spiritual realm. He is situated in svapna-sthänam, the dream-like
third state, on the margin of these two worlds. From that middle position he is
able to see both the material and the spiritual worlds.’

“Further, the following statement from the Båhad-äraëyaka, 4.3.18, describes the
nature of the marginal position of the jéva:

tad yathä mahä matsya ubhe kule’ 
nusaïcarati pürvaà ca paraà caivam 
eväyaà puruña etäv ubhäv antäv 
anusaïcarati svapnäntaà ca buddhäntaà ca

“‘The symptoms of the marginal existence are like those of a huge aquatic who is
capable of living on both the eastern and western sides of the river at his own
will. Similarly, the jéva soul, situated within the waters of the Causal Ocean,
which lies between the material and spiritual worlds, is able to reside in both
the dream world of matter and the spiritual world of divine wakefulness.’ 

Vrajanätha, “What is the Vedic understanding of the marginal situation, known as
taöasthä?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The borderline between water and land is called taöa.
Yet, the water is contiguous to the land; where then is the taöa, the margin?
The taöa is merely the demarcation that separates the water from land. This tata
is a very subtle state; it cannot be perceived through mundane vision. From this
allegory, we take the water as the spiritual world and the land as the material
world, thus the fine line that divides the two worlds is the taöa, the subtle
demarcation exactly whereupon the jéva soul is located.

“The countless atomic particles that float in the rays of the sun give an
inkling of the real position of the jéva. In one direction, the jéva sees the
spiritual universe, and in the other, he sees the phenomenal world, created by
Lord Brahmä, the world of mäyä. The cit-çakti of the Supreme Lord is unlimited
and the mäyä-çakti is enormous. Positioned exactly between the two are the
innumerable jévas. They are the products of Çré Kåñëa’s taöasthä-çakti and hence
by nature the jéva is marginal.”

Vrajanätha, “What is the taöasthä-svabhäva, marginal nature?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The jéva is situated in the middle with access to both
worlds and he is constitutionally susceptible to come under the control of
either of the çaktis. This condition is symptomatic of the taöasthä-svabhäva.
When the movement of river water shifts the bank of a river this seizes the land
and converts it into riverbed. Alternatively, silt may deposit into embankments,
which then gradually become land. Similarly, if the jéva looks towards Çré
Kåñëa, his faith in Kåñëa increases and he develops a stronger foothold in the
spiritual realm. However, if he looks at mäyä and turns his back to Çré Kåñëa,
he thereby becomes enmeshed in the network of mäyä. This choice is the natural
characteristic of the taöasthä-svabhäva.” 

Vrajanätha, “Is the mäyä-çakti in some way present in the constitutional
structure of the jéva?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “No, the jéva is a product of spiritual nature. However,
because he is infinitesimal in size, he lacks sufficient spiritual strength.
Therefore, he is vulnerable and can be easily defeated by mäyä, although mäyä is
actually totally absent in the constitution of the jéva.”

Vrajanätha, “One of my teachers taught me that a spiritual fragment of Brahman,
the Supreme, became engulfed by mäyä, and was thus transformed into the jéva. He
gave the example of the sky, which is the borderless ether until it is captured
within a boundary; for example, the portion of the sky enclosed within a pot.
Similarly, he said, the jéva is by nature Brahman, but when his Brahman nature
is covered by mäyä, Brahman then becomes jéva. What is the correct
understanding?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “This is simply the mäyävädé view. How can the
mäyä-çakti even touch Brahman, who is fully transcendental? Further, if one
believes that Brahman is latent, unmanifest energy without çakti, then how can
the mäyä-çakti even exist to approach Brahman? Furthermore, how may mäyä be
assertive when she has no independent potency and will? Brahman can never be
deluded by mäyä’s shroud of illusion. In addition, if one admits that Brahman is
endowed with cit-çakti, how then can the mäyä-çakti, an insignificant çakti
compared to Brahman and the cit-çakti, defeat the cit-çakti and create the jéva
out of Brahman?

“Brahman is immeasurable and indivisible. How then can Brahman be fragmented and
filled up in pots like some mundane material, like gas? It is a totally
unacceptable conclusion to say that mäyä can influence Brahman. Mäyä is
completely uninvolved in the process of creation of the jéva soul. In spite of
the miniscule size of the jéva, he is of a nature superior to mäyä.”

Vrajanätha, “Another one of my professors once explained that the jéva soul is
but a reflection of Brahman. Just as the sun is reflected on the surface of
water, Brahman, when reflected upon mäyä, is seen as the individual jéva soul.
Does this make any sense to you?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “This is also another mäyävädé speculation. Brahman is
boundless and unlimited, how can the boundless be reflected upon something
mundane and thus limited? It is against the Vedic tenets to say that Brahman can
be measured. This philosophy is illogical and aberrant.”

Vrajanätha, “Once an itinerant sannyäsé visiting Navadvépa said in a public
lecture that the jéva is non-existent, a product of illusion. If this illusion
is removed, there is only the undivided, non-differentiated Brahman and nothing
else. What was his point?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “This is yet another typically illogical mäyävädé
argument. According to the Vedic dictum of Chändogya Upaniñad, 6.2.1:

sad eva saumyedam agra äséd ekam evädvitéyam 

“‘In the very beginning before creation, when only that One Eternal Non-dual
Truth existed, was there anything besides Brahman?’ 

“So if Brahman was the only one in existence, where did bhrama, illusion, come
from? Secondly, who is under illusion? If the answer is that Brahman is in
illusion, then you are degrading Brahman from His supreme transcendental
position to something insignificant and secondary, and thus Brahman is not
Brahman, the Supreme. Furthermore, if one argues that illusion is a separate
entity, then this proposal contradicts the concept of non-duality, monism.”

Vrajanätha, “I remember attending a debate in Navadvépa where a brähmaëa paëòita
tried to establish the point that the jéva is the only reality in existence.
Thus, the jéva creates everything in his dream-state and therefore experiences
happiness and distress until, when the dream ceases, he sees that he is the
Brahman. Can you kindly explain this to me?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “This also reeks of illogical mäyävädé thought and word
jugglery. If, as the mäyävädés say, Brahman is undifferentiated, how is the
dream state produced along with all this differentiation from Brahman-state to
the jéva-state? Mäyävädés will never succeed in establishing the concept of
monism just by offering analogies such as, ‘Under illusion one confuses mother
of pearl with silver, or a rope with a snake.’ Their arguments are shallow and
misleading.”

Vrajanätha, “So far I have understood that the original identity of the jéva is
beyond the circle of influence of mäyä. Nonetheless, mäyä is able to captivate
the jéva because of the minute nature of his constitution. My question is: Did
the cit-çakti create the jéva, endowing him with his intrinsic
taöasthä-svabhäva?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “No, the cit-çakti is the full and absolute spiritual
energy of Çré Kåñëa and Her creations are all eternally perfect. The jéva is not
a nitya-siddha, an eternally perfect being. The jéva becomes perfect through
sädhana—that is he becomes a sädhana-siddha—and then experiences the same level
of spiritual bliss as that of a nitya-siddha. The four classes of sakhés serving
Çrématé Rädhikä are nitya-siddha. Çrématé Rädhikä is cit-çakti-svarüpa, the
embodiment of the cit-çakti, and these nitya-siddha-sakhés are Her käya-vyuha,
direct personal expansions. Thus, they emanate from the cit-çakti—Çrématé
Rädhikä Herself. 

“On the other hand, the jévas are produced by the jéva-çakti of Çré Kåñëa, the
taöasthä-çakti. The cit-çakti is pürëa-çakti, the full and complete potency of
Çré Kåñëa; whereas, the jéva-çakti is the apürëa-çakti, the incomplete and
partial energy of Çré Kåñëa. All full and absolute principles are
transformations of the pürëa-çakti. In contrast, the jévas, who are atomic
particles of consciousness, are the transformations of the apürëa-çakti. Çré
Kåñëa expands Himself, taking up various forms appropriate for presiding over
the different manifestations of His çakti. Correspondingly, He manifests
different kinds of entities according to the different kinds of potencies He
employs to create them. When presiding over the cit-çakti manifestation, Çré
Kåñëa manifests His original form as Çré Kåñëa in Vraja, or as Çré Näräyaëa, the
Lord of Vaikuëöha. When presiding over the jéva-çakti, He expands as Çré
Balaräma, His viläsa-mürti, which is the expansion that assists Çré Kåñëa in His
pastimes. When presiding over the mäyä-çakti, He accepts the triplicate Viñëu
expansions of Käraëodakaçäyé, Garbhodakaçäyé, and Kñérodakaçäyé.

“As Çré Kåñëa, in Vraja, He brings into existence everything that is fully and
wholly spiritual. In Vraja, expanded as Çré Balaräma, He generates the
nitya-siddha-pärñadä, the eternally liberated associates and servitors, who
execute the eight types of devotional service to Him as Çré Kåñëa in Vraja. In
Vaikuëöha, Çré Balaräma expands as Saìkarñaëa, Ananta Çeña, to generate the
nitya-siddha-pärñadä of Çré Näräyaëa who accomplish the eight kinds of service
to Him as Çré Näräyaëa in Vaikuëöha. Çré Saìkarñaëa then further expands as Mahä
Viñëu to preside over the mäyä-çakti. Mahä Viñëu generates the
taöasthä-çakti-jévas, borderline potency souls, who are susceptible to the
influence of mäyä, and further expands accepting the form of Paramätmä as the
heart of the taöasthä-çakti-jévas. 

“As long as these taöasthä-çakti-jévas generated by Mahä Viñëu do not receive
the shelter of the hlädiné-çakti, which is bestowed by His mercy alone, they are
always prone to be subjugated by mäyä. When captivated by mäyä, they are
obedient to the dictates of tri-guëa, the three modes of material nature. Hence,
the conclusion is that the jéva-çakti gives birth to the jévas, the cit-çakti
does not produce the jévas.” 

Vrajanätha, “Earlier you have explained that the spiritual world as well as the
jévas are eternal. How is it possible for eternal entities to have birth,
appearance, or creation? If they appear at a certain time and did not exist
before that, how does that confer eternality upon them?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Time and space as experienced in the material world is
quite different from the time and space of the spiritual world. Material time is
divided into three sections: past, present, and future. However, in the
spiritual world, time is ever-present and without division. All spiritual
activities and happenings of the transcendental realm are perceived in
vartamäna, the present; whereas, whatever incidents are normally experienced
here are rooted in the notions of mundane time and place. When we discuss
spiritual subjects and say things such as, ‘Later the jéva became entangled with
mäyä,’ ‘The spiritual world was created,’ ‘Mäyä has no function in the creation
of the jéva,’ and so on, our words are being influenced by the concepts of
material time. In our captive conditioned status this influence is very natural
and to be expected. In all discussions about the jéva and transcendence, our
thoughts cannot be freed from the concepts of mundane time, which automatically
enter our deliberations. Thus, inevitably, we talk and think in terms of past,
present, and future.

“However, when you consider the inner meaning of this topic, keep in mind that a
person who is solely searching for realization of the pure essence of the
Absolute Truth will perceive and apply the concept of the eternal, ever-present
time factor in his understanding of these topics. Dear young man, you must be
extremely cautious while deliberating upon this subject, simply absorb yourself
in the spiritual concepts and reject the unavoidable mundane dross caused by the
words.

“‘The eternal servant of Çré Kåñëa, the jéva, having forgotten his real
identity, has been imprisoned by mäyä, illusion.’ The Vaiñëavas repeat this
sentence very often. However, all Vaiñëavas know that the jéva has an eternal
nature of which there are two groups: nitya-baddha, eternally conditioned; and
nitya-mukta, eternally liberated.

“The subject is put in this way because the ordinary human intellect is in the
grips of pramäda, illusion, and therefore cannot fully comprehend transcendental
matters. However, the introspective sage perceives spiritual truth in the
quietness of his cit-samädhi, devotional meditation. All our speeches are
mundane and covered with material contamination—it is up to you to discern the
underlying pure truth. Concerning these topics, there is no room for debating
and arguing, because applying logic and rhetoric to spiritual subject matters
with their materially inconceivable concepts is a futile exercise.

“I am aware of the fact that you cannot immediately comprehend the depths of
this line of spiritual thought. However, as your devotional practice and
spiritual attachment increase, your power to discriminate between matter and
spirit will be sharpened. Your body and its present activities are mundane, but
in reality, you are not mundane, you are an infinitesimal spiritual entity. When
you learn more about yourself, you will realize how superior and different the
nature of your real self is from the phenomenal world.

“If I talk to you about your real self, or if you merely hear and read about it,
these instructions will not be very profitable for you. You must begin the
process by sincerely chanting harinäma, thereby your spiritual identity will be
manifest gradually and concordantly your perception of the spiritual world will
take discernible shape. Both mind and words are material products, therefore,
even untiring efforts in their application are unable to approach transcendental
topics. Hence, in the Vedas, Taittiréya Upaniñad, 2.4.1, we find:

yato väco nivartante apräpya manasä saha 

“‘That is Brahman. If mind and words are searching for Him, they return
unsuccessfully.’ 

“My advice for you is that you do not approach anyone and ask for a decision
upon this philosophy. Try to feel and realize it within yourself. So far I have
given you the hints and pointers.”

Vrajanätha, “You have said that jéva is like the spark of a fire and is also
like an atomic particle of the rays of the spiritual sun. What exactly is the
role of the jéva-çakti according to these analogies?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Çré Kåñëa is the conflagration, the Self-illuminating
Spiritual Sun. Thus, everything within the burning flames of Sun is fully
spiritual. The rays emanating from their source, the Spiritual Sun, are the
subservient expansions of the svarüpa-çakti. The paramäëu, atomic particles,
comprising the rays of this Spiritual Sun are the jévas. The svarüpa-çakti has
manifested the Sun planet; however, the activities that take place outside the
Sun globe are the activities of the jéva-çakti, the partial expansion of the
svarüpa-çakti. Therefore, any activities pertaining to the jévas are the action
of jéva-çakti alone.

“According to the Vedic statement, Svetäçvatara Upaniñad 6.8: 

paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate 

“‘The cit-çakti is the para-çakti, the highest absolute potency.’

“Outside the spiritual realm of the cit-çakti and between this spiritual realm
and the material realm of mäyä there is the field of the taöasthä-çakti where
the cit-çakti manifests Herself in Her partial expansion as the jéva-çakti,
thereby generating the eternal jévas in the taöasthä, marginal field.”

Vrajanätha, “A fire, the sun, and the burning sparks are all material inert
objects. Why are they used as analogies to describe spiritual topics?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “I have warned you earlier that using mundane words to
explain transcendental topics creates the situation wherein one has to deal with
unavoidable conceptual imperfections. In lieu of other possibilities, one is
forced to use the mundane analogies of the sun, sparks, and rays. In truth,
Kåñëa is a million and more times superior to the sun and the same is true of
His abode and His bodily lustre. Nevertheless, one may use such comparisons
because there is a helpful resemblance within them.

“However, these examples help to convey ideas for the elucidation of only a
limited number of specific qualities—not all the qualities in their entirety and
in all their aspects. The beauty and revealing luminosity of the sun and its
sunrays act as good analogies to show the corresponding qualities of the
Absolute Truth. However, the intrinsic qualities of the sun and the sunrays,
namely their ability to burn and their state of being gross matter, are not
comparable to spiritual objects. When one compares milk with water, one may be
attempting to illustrate a particular similarity, namely their liquid state.
Only that particular similarity of liquidity is being illustrated—not that milk
and water are the same in all respects. Hence, analogies assist in highlighting
the similarity of two entities on certain points, even if ultimately those two
entities are of contrasting natures.”

Vrajanätha, “On one hand there are the rays of the transcendental Sun, Çré
Kåñëa, and on the other the atomic particles floating within these rays. These
particles are non-different from the Sun and yet, as you have said, they are
eternally different. How is this possible?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “One of the characteristics of material nature is that
objects produced by other objects remain either attached to their source, or
separate completely from their source. For example, an egg produced by the bird
is totally separated from its source; whereas, the fingernails and hair grow
upon the human body and thus remain attached to their source, as long as they
are not cut and clipped. However, in the spiritual nature these matters are
completely different. 

“All emanations from the Spiritual Sun, Çré Kåñëa, are simultaneously one with
and different from Him. The sunrays and the atomic sunray particles are
inseparable and the same. Similarly, the jéva-çakti is compared to the sunrays
and the innumerable jévas are compared to the atomic particles of those sunrays.
The jéva-çakti and her constituent jévas are generated by Çré Kåñëa and remain
inseparably united with Him, just as the sun, the sunrays, and the atomic
particles of the sunrays are all undividedly one. Furthermore, although they are
one simultaneously, because of the minute independence the individual jévas
exercise, they are eternally separate from Kåñëa. Hence, the eternal truth is
that Çré Kåñëa and the jéva are simultaneously one with and different from each
other. 

“The paëòitas offer another example to drive home this point, though this
example being mundane is naturally provincial. A piece of gold jewellery is made
from a large block of gold and because it is gold the bracelet is not different
from the gold block. Nonetheless, because it is a bracelet it is also different
from the gold block. In spite of the inevitable inadequacy of this example one
idea is unequivocally conveyed: The transcendental Sun, Çré Kåñëa, is
non-different from His transcendental energy—both are spiritual entities. Çré
Kåñëa as the complete absolute divinity, source of all energies, is distinct in
volume and status from His infinitesimal products. Therefore, the analogy of
ghaöäkäça, the sky in a pot, and mahäkäça, the unlimited sky, proffered by the
monistic mäyävädés is not well-balanced and appropriate in the spiritual
context.”

Vrajanätha, “If spirit and matter differ generically in their natures, how could
any analogous comparison be appropriate?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “In material nature there are gradations of status,
which the naiyäyika, logicians, describe as nitya. However, such complete
discrepancy of status does not exist between matter and spirit. Provisionally,
we have discussed and established that cit, spirit, is reality and matter is
merely its vikära, vitiated transformation and reflection. The transformed
material reality is distinguished in several ways from the original spiritual
reality, although many affinities between the two remain. For example, in a
sleet rain, half of the downpour is snow and the rest is cold rainwater. A
portion of the snow has been transformed to produce the rainwater and has thus
acquired a dissimilar status from its original condition as snow. However, the
snow and rainwater are still similar because of their coolness. Similarly, in
the case of hot and cold water, they are both the same in their quality of
liquidity, but they differ in temperature. Hence, we can see that certain traits
of the original object persist despite its transformation into a derivative
object.

“This material world is a reflection and transformation of the spiritual world.
Yet, because there are certain characteristics in material nature still similar
to those of the spiritual world, spiritual subjects are discussed using
appropriate explanatory analogies, which take advantage of these similarities.
Another method is called the arundhaté-darçana-nyäya, the logical principle of
recognizing something more hidden and subtle by the aid of a large and easily
noticeable object that is near to the subtle object—the dim Arundhaté star is
found in the night sky by first finding the bright and obvious star nearby. By
comparing the gross characteristics of matter with its opposite nature, spirit,
we can surmise the esoteric truths of the spiritual nature as certain
characteristics inherent in the material nature are close to the spiritual
truths.

“The pastimes of Çré Kåñëa are absolutely spiritual; there is no contamination
by mundane characteristics. However, when these supramundane topics of Vraja
from the Çrémad-Bhägavatam are discussed in assemblies, individuals in the
audience receive different results, each according to their level of spiritual
consciousness. The gross materialist thinks that these narrations are stories
similar to those in fiction novels about ordinary heroes and heroines. The
madhyama-adhikäré applies the arundhaté-darçana principle and perceives the
spiritual truth underlying the descriptions. He experiences sublime bliss
because of his devotional mood and faithful approach to the subject. The
uttama-adhikäré becomes immersed in these sublime pastimes and thus relishes the
pure transcendental rasa. 

“What other means are there besides these principles of nyäya to instruct the
jévas about the Absolute Truth? How may the conditioned soul realize an
ineffable subject matter—which the faculties of the material mind and emotions
cannot penetrate—and then bask in its illuminating glory? I see no alternative
to analogies and principles such as the arundhaté-darçana-nyäya. The inherent
nature of material objects is that they are found either similar to another
material object or different from another material object. However, this is not
the case with the Supreme Lord and His energies, which are simultaneously one
and different. One must accept the reality that Çré Kåñëa and His jéva-çakti
along with her product, the unlimited jévas, are inconceivably and
simultaneously one with and different from each other.”

Vrajanätha, “Wherein lies the distinction between Éçvara and the jéva?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “First, I shall enumerate the eternal similarities
between Éçvara and the jéva and later their eternal distinctions. The Supreme
Lord is the embodiment of knowledge; the symbol of omniscience; the greatest
counsellor; the Self-manifest highest divinity; the illuminator of others; the
kñetrajïa, the knower of the fields of action; the Self-determined; the enjoyer.
These self-same qualities are also present in the jéva, but marginally. The Lord
absolutely epitomizes these characteristics because He is the unlimited
proprietor of the absolute supreme potency. However, in contrast, the jéva
because of his diminutive size and infinitesimal potency possesses these same
characteristics but in minimal degree. Thus, although there exists a disparity
in size and nature between the Lord and the jéva, in respect to the qualities
that both possess there is a close affinity.

“The omniscient Supreme Lord is the controller and master of the svarüpa-çakti,
jéva-çakti, and mäyä-çakti. These varieties of His çakti are His maidservants,
ready to execute His bidding alone without individual prerogatives. The
qualities of the Lord are certainly present within the jéva in miniscule
amounts, nevertheless the jéva is still subject and subordinate to the dictates
of the Lord’s çakti.

“In the teachings of the Daça-müla, fifth verse, the word mäyä does not
exclusively indicate the mundane jaòa-mäyä; mäyä also very definitely indicates
the svarüpa-çakti of the Lord, which is also known as Yogamäyä. According to
etymology …méyate anayä iti mäyä… ‘That by which one can measure is mäyä.’ The
çakti of the Lord that connects Çré Kåñëa to the spiritual world, to the jéva,
and to the material nature is also known as mäyä. Çré Kåñëa is the Lord of mäyä
and the jéva is Her captive slave. The Svetäçvatara Upaniñad, 4.9-10, comments:

yasmän mäyé såjate viçvam etat
tasmiàç cänyo mäyayä sannirüòhaù
mäyäà tu prakåtià vidyän
mäyinaà tu maheçvaram
tasyävayava-bhütais tu
vyäptaà sarvam idaà jagat

“‘The ingredients with which the Supreme Godhead, the Lord of mäyä, creates this
universe and into which the captive of mäyä, the jéva, enters is known as
prakåti, or mäyä. The Supreme Lord, controller of mäyä, pervades the entire
creation in His Universal Form.’

“According to this quotation from the Vedas the word mäyé refers to the Lord of
mäyä, Çré Kåñëa. The word prakåti means the sampürëa-çakti, the complete,
absolute energy. This pre-eminent superiority and absolute nature is the divine
prerogative of the Supreme Lord. The jéva neither possess these traits in the
present conditioned state, nor even when he is liberated. The eternal
distinction between the jéva and Bhagavän is stated in Brahma-sütra, 4.417:

jagad-vyäpära varjjaà prakaraëäd asamihitatvät 

“‘The work of creation, maintenance, and governance of the entire material and
spiritual worlds can be enacted by the Supreme Brahman alone and no other
individual can perform these activities. The liberated jévas are able to conduct
other works, but not His.’

“The comment of the Taittiréya Upaniñad on this topic is: 

yato va imäni bhütäni jäyante

“‘The Supreme Brahman is the one who is the primal source of all the living
entities, the sustainer of everything, and at the same time the destination into
whom the total dissolution enters.’ 

“Even if one stretches the meanings of the words, the jéva, liberated or
otherwise, is not indicated anywhere in this verse as performing the activities
of creation, maintenance, and destruction. In the entire çruti and småti of the
Vedic scriptures, Bhagavän alone has been accredited with controlling the
universal affairs, never the jéva. Hypothetically, if the individual jévas were
to be entrusted with such immense powers of creation, maintenance, and
destruction, then humanity would be faced with the unwelcome philosophical
predicament known as bahv-éçvara-doña, the faulty concept of many individual
éçvaras, controllers. Hence, one should clearly understand that even liberated
souls are inadequate in the matter of creation, maintenance, and annihilation of
the cosmic manifestation. This eternal distinction between the jéva and the
Supreme Lord is always applicable and inescapable. Therefore, one should realize
that the statement, ‘The jéva is the eternal servitor of Çré Kåñëa,’ is an
actual mahä-väkya, an important dictum.”

Vrajanätha, “If the eternal difference is perfectly and conclusively proved,
when and how does the principle of non-difference become an active principle?
Furthermore, if this concept of eternal non-difference actually does become
active shall we have to accept ultimately the concept of nirväëa, the jéva
merging into Brahman?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “No, my dear son, that is emphatically not the case. At
no stage does the jéva become non-different from the Supreme Lord.”

Vrajanätha, “Yet, did you not say that they are inconceivably and simultaneously
one and different?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “On the basis of his spiritual nature and qualities, the
jéva is eternally non-different from Çré Kåñëa, but on the grounds of his
spiritual identity, the jéva is eternally distinct from Kåñëa. Their oneness is
eternal and their distinction is also eternal, and the aspect of eternal
distinction between them is pre-eminent and conspicuous. For example, one may
say, ‘This house is the property of Devadatta.’ Simultaneously, one may also
state, ‘Devadatta is not present in the house.’ Of the two simultaneously
correct statements, the fact that ‘the house is the property of Devadatta’ is
clearly the pre-eminent statement of the two. Another example from the material
world is the visible sky, it is inert matter and has a source, but in spite of
its having oneness with its source—the general outer space—the visible sky is
self-evident by its distinction from its source, outer space. In fact, its
identity is discerned by this actual distinction from its source. Thus, the
eternal difference of the jéva from the Supreme Lord, in spite of His
simultaneous eternal oneness with the Supreme Lord, actually bestows upon the
jéva his eternal identity and is thus the most important aspect of their eternal
relationship.”

Vrajanätha, “Kindly tell me more about the eternal nature of the jéva.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The jéva is an infinitesimal spiritual entity endowed
by his very nature with consciousness, thus he has knowledge. He possesses
self-identity, is an enjoyer, a thinker, and an intelligent being. The jéva is
the proprietor of an eternal identity, which is extremely esoteric and subtle.
The material human body is made up of limbs, ears, nose, etc. Similarly, the
spiritual body of the jéva is embellished with perfect spiritual features and
this is his eternal form. When the jéva becomes conditioned, two upädhis, false
identities, cover his atomic, eternal, spiritual form. The first cover is his
liëga-çaréra, the subtle mental body, and the second covering is his
sthüla-çaréra, gross physical body.

“Unavoidable for the conditioned jéva is the upädhi of the liëga-çaréra, which
he acquires from the moment of his captivity by mäyä, and which remains with him
until he becomes liberated. At the time of death, the jéva changes his old gross
body for another one, but not his subtle body. The subtle body transports the
jéva, with all his desires regarding material activity, when he leaves one gross
body for another at the time of death. The details and the principles of this
change of the material body are described in the Chändogya Upaniñad and the
Brahma-sütra. It is known as païcägni-vidyä, the five fiery substances, which
are citägni, våñöyägni, bhojanägni, and retohavanägni, etc.

“The nature and tendencies of the conditioned jéva in his new life and body are
decided by the desires and saàskäras, purificatory ceremonies, of his previous
life. He acquires his status and caste according to them. His works and actions
in his present life are prompted by his position within the system of
varëäsrama, and after death and the subsequent rebirth into a new body the same
process is repeated. These are the two coverings of the eternal spiritual
identity of the jéva—the sthüla-çaréra and the liëga-çaréra.”

Vrajanätha, “What is the difference between the nitya-çaréra, eternal form of
the jéva, and his liëga-çaréra?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The nitya-çaréra is fully spiritual and faultless and
makes up the real identity of the jéva, his true self and ego. The liëga-çaréra
is acquired when the jéva comes into contact with matter. It consists of three
vitiated transformations of the spiritual energy: mana, mind; buddhi,
intelligence; and ahaìkära, false ego.”

Vrajanätha, “Are mana, buddhi, and ahaìkära material substances? If so, then why
are they merited with jïäna, consciousness and knowledge, and kriyä, action?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Bhagavad-gétä, 7.4-6, declares:

bhümir äpo ’nalo väyuù
khaà mano buddhir eva ca
ahaìkära itéyaà me
bhinnä prakåtir añöadhä

“‘Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all together
these eight constitute My separated material energies.’ 

apareyam itas tv anyäà
prakåtià viddhi me paräm
jéva-bhütäà mahä-bäho
yayedaà dhäryate jagat

“‘Besides these, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is another superior energy of
Mine, which comprises the living entities who are exploiting the resources of
this material, inferior nature.’

etad-yonéni bhütäni
sarväëéty upadhäraya
ahaà kåtsnasya jagataù
prabhavaù pralayas tathä

“‘All created beings have their source in these two natures. Of all that is
material and all that is spiritual in this world, know for certain that I am
both the origin and the dissolution.’

“According to this quotation from the Gétopaniñad, sarva-çaktimän Bhagavän
possesses two distinct prakåti, natures: the para-prakåti, the superior
spiritual nature; and the aparä-prakåti, the inferior material nature. His
para-prakåti is the jéva-çakti and his aparä-prakåti is the jaòa-çakti, which is
also known as the mäyä-çakti. The jéva-çakti is part and parcel of the Supreme
Lord, hence it is known as the para-çakti, whereas the mäyä-çakti is the
external material energy, so she is called aparä-çakti. The jéva is distinct
from the aparä-çakti. The inferior aparä-çakti comprises the eight material
elements, which are the five gross elements plus the three subtle elements. The
three subtle elements are mana, buddhi, and ahaìkära. These three are the
internal, subtle elements comprising the liëga-çaréra, nevertheless they are
wholly material. Although these three exhibit some form of consciousness and
knowledge because of the presence of the jéva within them, it is not
transcendental consciousness but mundane vitiated consciousness by the effect of
the attachment of the jéva to the inferior mäyä-çakti.

“The sensual impressions the mind receives from the material world are coloured
by the residual material concepts and ideas held within the liëga-çaréra from
the many previous lifetimes of the jéva. Thus, this colouring of the conditioned
mind is materialistic and not transcendental. Mundane intelligence then analyses
this coloured display of information presented by the material mind to discern
whether such information is acceptable or not. Then, the faculty that in the
final analysis accepts or rejects this analysis of the material knowledge is the
mundane false ego. 

“These three material elements, mana, buddhi, and ahaìkära, energised by the
presence of the jéva within them, amalgamate to produce a mundane, second
identity called the liëga-çaréra, which becomes so strong that it veils the
actual eternal spiritual ego of the jéva. Since the jéva is eternally related to
the transcendental Sun Çré Kåñëa as His integral part and parcel, the jéva’s
original, spiritual ego is similarly eternal. When the soul attains liberation,
this original spiritual ego becomes uncovered and is overtly manifest. However,
as long as the eternal spiritual ego of the jéva remains hidden by his
liëga-çaréra, his identification with the material world will be the more
pronounced and his spiritual ego non-assertive and practically absent. Being
noumenal, the liëga-çaréra of the jéva is covered by his sthüla-çaréra, which
executes the desired kriyä, actions, of the bound jéva. The sthüla-çaréra then
becomes identified with its false temporary ego in the form of status, position,
etc., within the social system of varëäsrama. 

“Mana, buddhi, and ahaìkära are indeed material, but because they
interpret—perversely—the ätmä-våti, inclinations of the real self, the soul
within, they falsely lay claim to being the sources of consciousness, knowledge,
and action.”

Vrajanätha, “Respected master, I have now understood that the eternal form of
the jéva is atomic cit and that his limbs, features, and nature are all sublime
and beautiful. In the conditioned state of the jéva, the liëga-çaréra veils this
beautiful form. Thus, the gross material covering completely corrupts and
perverts the original and actual identity of the jéva. Is the jéva in his
mukta-avasthä, emancipated condition, completely flawless?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Since he is the atomic part and parcel of Çré Kåñëa,
the spiritual form of the jéva is certainly faultless, but incomplete because of
the vulnerability of his extremely diminutive size. Thus, the only discernible
weakness in his faultless condition is that in a close encounter with the
powerful mäyä-çakti his spiritual nature can be eclipsed and concealed. The
Çrémad Bhägavatam, 10.2.32, describes this as follows:

ye ’nye ’ravindäkña vimukta-mäninas
tvayy asta-bhäväd aviçuddha-buddhayaù
äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù
patanty adho ’nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù 

“‘O lotus-eyed one, those who think they are liberated in this life, but do not
render devotional service to You must be of impure intelligence. Although they
accept severe austerities and penances and rise to the spiritual position, to
impersonal Brahman realization, they fall down again because they neglect to
worship Your lotus feet.’

“Therefore we see that however elevated a position a liberated soul may attain,
his dependent constitution remains permanent. This is, in fact, the definition
of the jéva-tattva. Therefore the Vedas reiterate that Bhagavän is the Lord of
mäyä, and that the jéva is, in all situations, susceptible to the subjugation of
mäyä being the taöasthä-çakti.”

Thus ends the fifteenth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma:
Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana, Part Three: The Jéva, the Eternal Individual
Spirit Soul 

JDH 16: Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Chapter Sixteen
Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Part Four: The Jéva Swallowed by Mäyä, the Illusory Energy 

Vrajanätha returned home, pondering over the true nature of the jéva as he had
just heard from the Daça-müla. Lying in his bed at night, he considered, “My
question regarding, ‘Who am I?’ has been answered and I realize now that I am
but a spark of a ray emanating from the transcendental Sun, Çré Kåñëa. Although
minute in size, I am inherently eternal, cognizant, and of the nature of a drop
of unlimited transcendental bliss. Even though I am infinitesimal, I possess a
spiritual identity and my spiritual form closely resembles the spiritual form of
Çré Kåñëa. As a consequence of my spiritual form being unmanifest, I am
presently experiencing the misfortunes of material life. My good fortune will
arise once I sincerely endeavour to reawaken my spiritual form and identity. I
must understand why this pall of misfortune has come to hang over me and will
clarify this matter with my guru tomorrow.” 

Sleep stealthily crept in around midnight and in the hours before dawn
Vrajanätha dreamt of giving up material life and becoming a Vaiñëava. After
awakening, he lay contemplating the hope that perhaps the Lord would help him
escape his material entanglement. He had just gone out and taken a seat in the
courtyard upon the raised platform used for religious festivals when a group of
his young students came and touched his feet, offering him their respects and
addressing him as follows, “We have learnt innumerable arguments on logic from
you in the past. Now our desire is to be tutored on the famous book of logic,
Nyäya Kusumäïjali.”

Vrajanätha replied unpretentiously, “I have packed away all my books for good,
and just like the illustrious Nimäi Paëòita I am determined to take a new path.
You should approach another teacher.”

At the same time that the students were leaving, Çré Caturbhuja Miçra came in to
see Vrajanätha’s grandmother with a marriage proposal for Vrajanätha. He
explained to her, “Çré Vijaynätha Bhaööäcärya hails from aristocracy and his
daughter is very beautiful. She would be an excellent match for your grandson.
The Bhaööäcärya has not yet promised his daughter to anyone. Vrajanätha may
accept the proposal right away.” 

Having overheard this conversation, Vrajanätha thought, “What a dilemma! Here I
am seriously considering leaving family and home and, at this most inopportune
moment, along comes a marriage proposal arranged by my grandmother.” 

The question became a most contentious issue, driving his mother, grandmother
and the other elder ladies of the family to one side of the dispute. On the
other side, Vrajanätha found himself alone. The entire day became wasted in
argument and counter-argument, and eventually the evening descended almost
unnoticed. However, soon rain clouds announced their presence with deep
rumblings and bolts of lightning, which served to mute the loud discussion. A
heavy downpour soon followed, and so it became impossible for Vrajanätha to go
to Mäyäpura that day. Early next morning the continuing contention on the
marriage issue again spoiled Vrajanätha’s mood and appetite. Not until after
dark could Vrajanätha leave his house. He then hurried to the little kuöéra of
Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé and falling flat upon the ground offered prostrate
obeisances. 

The revered Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé said, “The rains must have kept you from
coming last night, I am very happy that you have come now.”

Vrajanätha burst out saying, “Dear master, suddenly I have been faced with a
serious problem, which I would like to explain later. For now I request you to
clarify a certain question: The jéva is of pure spiritual substance, why then
does he have to descend into the degraded material world?” 

A gentle smile appeared on Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé’s lips and he replied with the
sixth çloka of the Daça-müla:

svarüpärthair hénän nija-sukha-parän kåñëa-vimukhän
harer mäyä-dandyän guëa-nigaòa-jälaiù kalayati
tathä sthülair lingai dvi-vidhävaraëaiù kleça-nikarair
mahäkarmälänair nayati patitän svarga nirayau 

“‘By his svarüpa, eternal constitution, the jéva is the surrendered servitor of
Çré Kåñëa and is meant to serve the Lord eternally. The conditioned souls who
are alienated from their svarüpa are wallowing in the illusion of false pride
and material enjoyment. They have rejected Çré Kåñëa; hence, they are being
penalized by the mäyä-çakti, who binds them with three chains in the form of the
three material modes, namely sattva, räja, and tama. Furthermore, she covers the
svarüpa of the jéva with the subtle body and then the gross body, thus
imprisoning the jéva in the excruciating cycle of karmic reactions, which at
times heaves him up to Heaven, or pushes him down to Hell.’

“In Goloka Våndävana, Çré Balaräma manifests unlimited nitya-pärñadäs, eternal
associates, belonging to the jéva category for the service of Çré Kåñëa.
Similarly, in Vaikuëöha, Lord Saìkarñaëa manifests unlimited nitya-pärñadäs also
of the jéva category for the service of Çré Näräyaëa. These nitya-pärñadäs are
eternally engaged in serving their object of worship, the Supreme Godhead, who
is absorbed in rasa. They are eternally situated in their svarüpa, remain
constantly engrossed in satisfying their beloved Lordship, and ever possess
enthusiasm and affection for the Lord that never diminishes. They are forever
extremely spiritually potent, being imbued with the cit-çakti of the Lord. They
have no connection with mäyä—they are even unmindful of her existence. They are
permanent residents of the spiritual world and are very far away from mäyä. They
are fully absorbed in simply relishing the bliss of devotional service to their
beloved Lord. Selfish material joys and sorrows are totally alien to these
eternally liberated souls. Prema being their life and soul, they do not even
know that lamentation, death or fear actually exist.

“Also, countless, infinitesimal jévas emanate from Käraëodakaçäyé Mahä Viñëu,
lying within the Causal Ocean, whose glance impregnates the mäyä-çakti. As these
jévas are the neighbours of mäyä, they witness her variegatedness. The symptoms
of the general mass of jévas as discussed earlier are also present in these
jévas. However, because they are minuscule in size and situated at the margin,
their constitutional nature is to look at both the material world and the
spiritual sky. Their marginal condition makes them vulnerable because—up to this
point of time—they have not been reinforced with cit-bala, the strength of
spiritual potency, by the mercy of the Supreme Lord, their worshipable object.
Those amongst them who desire to enjoy material nature become absorbed in matter
and are thus eternally enthralled by her, while those endeavouring to serve the
Divine Worshipable Object, upon receiving His mercy, are elevated to the
spiritual world. Therefore, my son, we are in a most wretched state. Having
forgotten our devotion and service to Çré Kåñëa, we are held as the captives of
mäyä, and thus, in lieu of our original transcendental status, we are in this
miserable situation.”

Vrajanätha, “Dear master! I understand that the jéva is the taöasthä-çakti of
the Lord and is situated at the taöa, junction, of both worlds. However, why are
some jévas subsequently engrossed in material existence, while others are
elevated to the spiritual sky?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The transcendental qualities of the Supreme Lord Çré
Kåñëa are also present in the jéva, but up to a very small degree. The quality
of free will natural to Çré Kåñëa is therefore innate to the constitution of the
jéva and microscopic in content. When the jéva makes proper use of his
independence, he remains connected with Çré Kåñëa, but by misusing of his
independence, he dissociates himself from the Lord and is attracted to
exploiting and enjoying material nature. Developing the despicable quality of
false pride, he thinks, ‘I am the enjoyer of everything I survey.’ Thus, the
five levels of nescience—tämisra, rebellious rejection of the Lord’s service;
andha-tämisra, considering death to be the ultimate conclusion; tamas, ignorance
of one’s position as a jéva; moha, the illusory bodily conception of life;
mahä-moha, attachment for material enjoyment——cloud the pure spiritual
consciousness of the jéva. The sole cause of why the jéva becomes either
liberated or conditioned lies in the proper or improper use of his minute
independence.”

Vrajanätha, “Çré Kåñëa is karuëamaya, unlimitedly merciful, yet why did He
create such weak jévas? As a result of their weakness, they become lured into
subjugation by mäyä.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “What you say is true. Kåñëa is karuëamaya, but He is
also lélämaya, dynamic and eternally engages in pastimes. With the view that the
jéva could become an active partner for His various léläs, the Supreme Lord has
made him versatile and capable of rising from his humble position as a marginal
being to the soaring heights of mahä-bhäva, the highest spiritual consciousness,
which is unlimited and transcendental. To make the jéva strongly determined and
facilitate his ascension to this divine position, the Lord has also created the
various levels of material energy from gross matter up to ahaìkära, which
reaches its depths with misidentification with matter. Should the jéva choose
the path of material progress the inert matter presents practically
insurmountable obstacles in the jéva’s search for supreme happiness. The jévas,
who are moving down to this material entanglement, seeking only to satisfy their
senses, are divorced from their svarüpa and thus increasingly distance
themselves from the Supreme Lord. They become more and more depraved, but the
infinitely compassionate Lord, with His transcendental abode and eternal
associates, descends to earth and appears before them in person to offer them
the opportunity of elevation to the highest spiritual destination. The jévas who
take this opportunity to elevate themselves gradually rise to the transcendental
realm and acquire the same position as the nitya-pärñadäs.

Vrajanätha, “Why must the individual souls suffer so that the Lord can enjoy
these léläs?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “One should consider that to possess and exercise free
will is indeed a special grace of Çré Kåñëa. Inert matter is without free will,
hence non-essential and extraneous. The jéva, on the other hand, by asserting
his free will has attained the position of lordship over the material world.
Suffering and pleasure are different conditions of the mind. What we call
suffering, another person attached to the same condition will define as
pleasure. The final outcome of all material pleasure, however, is pain. The
materially engrossed person accumulates only misery in the end and upon
experiencing the worsening of his situation he desires undiluted, endless
happiness. Intensification of this desire arouses his conscience and power of
discrimination, leading to inquisitiveness and enquiry into the ultimate
reality. The attitude of sincere enquiry leads to sädhu-saìga, which bestows
çraddhä and thus installs the jéva on the path of self-elevation. 

“Therefore suffering is ultimately a boon. Impure gold is purified by firing and
repeated hammering; similarly, when the jéva is contaminated by the fancy to
enjoy his senses to the extreme—making him turn away from Kåñëa—he needs to be
purified by the fire and hammering of excruciating material experiences. In this
sense the sufferings of a gross materialist are auspicious and the mercy of the
Lord. Therefore, the misery suffered by the jéva in the pastimes of Çré Kåñëa is
considered as good and beneficial by far-sighted visionaries, while the myopic
materialists abhor it as deathly suffering. 

Vrajanätha, “I agree that the sufferings of the conditioned jévas are ultimately
beneficial, but presently it is very painful. Was it not within the means of the
omnipotent Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa to change this torturous path of material
existence into an easier one?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The léläs of Çré Kåñëa are unlimited and variegated;
hence, this also is another of His many unique activities. When the Supreme
Autocrat wilfully engages in a kaleidoscope of pastimes, why should it be
unusual for Him to enact this particular pastime? If the principle of variegated
léläs is kept intact, not a single type of lélä can be rejected. Whatever the
lélä, the participants assisting the Lord may have to accept many hardships and
pain. Çré Kåñëa is the puruña, the Supreme Enjoyer and Absolute Master. All the
upakaraëa, participants and paraphernalia, are fully under the control of the
puruña and they are the working tools of the Supreme Creator. In fully
surrendering oneself to the sweet will of the Supreme Lord, it is only natural
that one may have to accept adversities also. If finally this material adversity
turns into an auspicious state that is far from miserable, then why ultimately
should one call it adversity? On the transcendental platform, the tribulations
of the jéva while trying to satisfy the Lord in His pastimes are by all accounts
pleasurable. Yet, the conditioned soul by misuse of his free will denies himself
the exultation one experiences whilst directly assisting Çré Kåñëa in His
transcendental pastimes. Instead, he embraces mäyä who gives him only acute
harassment. If anyone is to blame for this dilemma, it is the jéva, and
definitely not Kåñëa.”

Vrajanätha, “If the jéva were not allocated his share of free will, would
anything have gone amiss? Çré Kåñëa is omniscient, so He knew that the jéva
would have to suffer if given free will. Considering this case, is Çré Kåñëa not
to be made responsible for the misery of the jéva?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Svatantratäm, free choice, is indeed the rarest of
gems. If none of the many entities in the material world were given free choice
that would imply the existence of far fewer significant beings, and ultimately,
if the jéva were not endowed with free will, he would simply be reduced to inert
and insignificant matter. The jéva is part and parcel of cid-vastu, the absolute
transcendence; hence, he possesses the same qualities as the Absolute Whole, but
in minute measure. Supreme independence is the intrinsic characteristic of the
ultimate spiritual substance, Çré Kåñëa, and to separate a substance from its
innate characteristics is of course impossible. Therefore, free will is
certainly present in the nature of the jéva, but proportionate to his
infinitesimal size. The intrinsic constitutional presence of free will has
elevated the jéva to a much higher status than matter and has made him its lord
and master in the material sense. It has also favoured him with the possibility
of becoming the dearmost servitor of the Supreme Lord. 

“Yet when the same jéva misuses his innate free choice and thus becomes
engrossed in material activities, the merciful Çré Kåñëa is stricken by
compassion and concerned about the bad fortune of the jéva. Lamenting, the Lord
shadows the movement of the jéva, planning means to save him. Çré Kåñëa knows
that His nectarean and immortal léläs are not available to the conditioned jéva
and thus out of deep compassion, He manifests His acintya-lélä, inconceivable
and wonderful pastimes, from within the material nature for the edification of
the conditioned jéva. However, realizing that the jéva in his conditioned state
is unable to properly comprehend His transcendental activities, Çré Kåñëa has
descended to earth at Navadvépa, appearing as the most munificent incarnation,
Çré Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Acting as the divine spiritual master, Çré
Mahäprabhu has initiated the jéva into a supremely efficacious method for his
salvation. He has explained the esoteric truth about the transcendental name,
form, qualities and pastimes of the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa, simultaneously
taking the position of a pure devotee and teaching the science of pure
devotional service by His own exemplary conduct. My dear boy! Could one possibly
think of blaming such a magnanimous Lord? The compassion of Çré Kåñëa is
immeasurable, and the condition of the fallen souls is most lamentable.”

Vrajanätha, “Does not the mäyä-çakti embody our ill fate, and is she not our
enemy? If the omnipotent and omniscient Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa had dissipated
mäyä, then would not the torment of the jéva have been alleviated?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The mäyä-çakti is the shadow of the svarüpa-çakti of
the Supreme Lord, thus she is a vitiated transformation of that purely
transcendental energy. The Lord uses mäyä as a tool to purify the contaminated
jéva and make him eligible for elevation. Mäyädevé, the embodiment of the
mäyä-çakti, is a maidservant of Çré Kåñëa who chastises and cures the errant
conditioned souls estranged from Kåñëa. When the jéva, a fully spiritual entity,
forgets his position as an eternal servant of Çré Kåñëa, he unnecessarily
commits a serious blunder. As a consequence of this aberration the jéva is
sentenced to repeated punishment carried out by Mäyädevé, who looms before the
jéva like a witch. The material world is a prison for the errant jéva. Just as a
king builds prisons out of kindness to protect his subjects from harm,
similarly, the munificent Çré Kåñëa has provided this material creation as a
reform-house for the jévas and Mäyädevé takes the role of the prison
superintendent.” 

Vrajanätha, “If this material world resembles a jail, what then are the
fetters?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Mäyädevé is armed with three types of chains made
respectively from sattva-guëa, räja-guëa, and tama-guëa, and with these chains
the condemned jévas are bound. Whether bound by sattva, räja or tama, all the
conditioned jévas are in fetters. Chains may be made of gold, silver or iron—the
metals may differ, but nonetheless they are chains.”

Vrajanätha, “If we agree that the jéva is spiritual, how then can the chains of
mäyä bind or hold him in bondage?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Spiritual nature is absolutely beyond the circle of
influence of the material nature. However, as soon as the jéva falsely claims to
be the enjoyer of mäyä, he is enwrapped in a liëga-çaréra based upon ahaìkära.
Mäyädevé then shackles this subtle body of the jéva with her chains.”

“The jévas covered by ahaìkära in the mode of goodness are residents of the
higher material heavenly planets; these devatäs are shackled in the golden
chains of sattva-guëa. The jévas covered by ahaìkära in the mode of passion have
a mixture of the propensities of the devatäs and the human beings; they are
bound by the silver chain of raja-guëa. The jévas covered by ahaìkära in the
mode of ignorance are hopelessly inebriated by abominable carnal cravings meant
to squeeze out gross material happiness; they are fettered in the iron chains of
tama-guëa. The chained-up jéva souls cannot step out of the prison house, they
are caged in by boundless miseries.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the activities of the jévas held captive in the prison
house of Mäyädevé?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “First of all, their activities are aimed at satisfying
their particular inclinations for materialistic sense enjoyment. Secondly, they
act to gain relief from the constant sufferings that accompany prison life.” 

Vrajanätha, “Please explain in more detail the first type of material activity
of the jéva—the search for sense enjoyment.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The gross covering of the jéva is his material body,
which passes through six phases: one, it takes birth; two, it grows; three, it
attains maturity and maintains; four, it produces by-products; five, it
deteriorates; and six, is destroyed. These six transformations are inherent in
the gross material body; additionally, the body undergoes hunger, thirst and
other discomforting needs. The conditioned jéva, now residing in the gross body,
is instigated to constant activity by these interminable desires to gratify his
senses and is thus enslaved by the urges of eating, sleeping, mating and
defending, etc. All his activities are ultimately directed to excite and satisfy
his senses. 

“To acquire such desired objectives, he may take the option of material piety
and from his birth to his last breath perform the ten Vedic puëya saàskäras,
pious ritualistic activities, to maintain himself and acquire his material
goals. Additionally, he may execute the eighteen sacrificial rites as taught in
the Vedas with the motive of accruing sufficient piety in his present birth to
ensure his elevation after death to the heavenly planets, wherein celestial yet
nevertheless material delights await him. Returning to earth thereafter, he is
certain to take birth in a brähmaëa family or some other high family, and lead a
life of contentment. 

“The other option for the conditioned soul in his search for sensual happiness
is to take up the path of impious sinful ways, having gone astray from the path
of dharma. With these two kinds of activities—pious and impious—the jéva decides
upon his next life. In the former, the jéva takes birth as a human being after
his sojourn in the celestial planets, and in the latter, after a sacrilegious
sinful life, he enters different hellish planets wherein he has to endure
terrible tortures, after which he finally attains another mortal body, but not
necessarily as a human being. On either path, he is at all times a conditioned
jéva held as the captive of the mäyä-çakti. Thus, beginning at a time one cannot
trace, the jéva is tied to the giant wheel of karma making him perpetually
traverse this material nature while he incessantly pursues the material goals of
sense gratification. He goes back and forth from materially auspicious
conditions through his pious deeds to temporary torment through his misdeeds.”

Vrajanätha, “Please speak in detail about the second type of material
activity—the attempt to alleviate material distress.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The spirit soul, presently residing in his material
tabernacle, undertakes various activities to remove his privations and overcome
his distresses. He builds houses for his shelter, comfort and protection. He has
to make proper arrangements to appease his hunger and to quench his thirst. To
ensure this supply, he has to work tirelessly and accumulate wealth for heating
and clothing to avert the bitter winters. He has to marry to satiate his lust.
He continues to work hard in order to make sure that his children and relatives
are abundantly provided for and so that no deficiency arises. When his body is
attacked by disease, he does everything to get healthy again. He fights for
protecting his assets and interests in court. He comes fully under the sway of
the six foes—käma, lust; krodha, anger; lobha, greed; mada, intoxication; moha,
illusion; mätsarya, hate and envy—which goad him into fights, violence, hatred,
harassing others, stealing, cruelty, and other such evil deeds, all in an
attempt to avoid adversity. Thus, the fallen jéva wastes his days and nights
only in gratifying his senses and attempting to prevent privations.”

Vrajanätha, “If Mäyädevé had covered the jéva with just the subtle body, would
this not have served her purpose?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “No, work cannot be performed with the subtle body
alone; hence, the gross body is a necessity. Actions performed by the gross body
arouse various desires in the subtle body, and to fulfil these desires a
suitable gross body is bestowed in the next life.”

Vrajanätha, “How are the actions and their results interlinked? The mimäàsä
philosophers postulate that Éçvara, the Supreme Controller, who supposedly
personally supervises the results of all karma, is a fictitious being. According
to them, karma gives birth to a mechanistic principle called apürva, the
exceptional, and it is this principle that calculates and then gives out the
result of karma. Is this concept a fact?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The mimäàsä philosophers, overly concerned with the
principle of karma, are not conversant with the philosophical conclusions of the
Vedas. Passing vague judgments by observing the mood in which certain
ritualistic performances are recommended in the scriptures, they espouse a
feeble philosophy. Truly, the Vedas disagree with their views. For example, in
the Vedas, Çvetäçvatara Upaniñad, 4.6, and Muëòaka Upaniñad, 3.1.1, we find:

dvä suparëä sayujä sakhäyä samänaà våkñaà pariñasvajäte 
tayor anyaù pippalaà svädv atty anaçnann anyo ‘bhicäkaçéti

“‘Two birds, Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu (Paramätmä) and the individual jéva, are
perched like friends on the same branch of a peepul tree, which represents the
material body. One of them, the jéva, is eating the fruit of the tree according
to his karma, while the other, the Paramätmä, is a silent non-participating
witness.’

“The purport of this verse is that the jéva, enthralled by mäyä, performs karma
and tastes the fruits of his actions. The Supreme Lord, controller of mäyä,
administers the results according to the actions of the jéva. As long as jéva is
unable to attain a direct audience with the Lord, the Lord continues to perform
pastimes with jéva appropriate to his situation. Where is the mechanistic apürva
principle of the mimäàsä philosophers in this context? Atheistic views are never
conclusive and perfect.”

Vrajanätha, “Why did you refer to the karma of the jéva as being anädi,
beginningless?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The prime cause for all karma is the desire to execute
such karma. Avidyä, ignorance, is the root of this material desire and is
defined as forgetfulness of the truth: ‘I am the eternal servitor of Çré Kåñëa.’
This avidyä did not suddenly sprout out within the time-span of the material
universal creation—the seed of this root of karma originates in the matrix of
the taöasthä position of the jéva at the juncture the material and spiritual
creations. Since the source of karma is thus untraceable within the mundane time
of material world, karma is said to be anädi.”

Vrajanätha, “What is the distinction between mäyä and avidyä?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Mäyä is a çakti of Çré Kåñëa; through her Kåñëa has
created the material cosmos. With the intention of redeeming the rebellious
wayward jévas, the Lord has instigated the mäyä-çakti and made her dynamic.
Thus, mäyä has two aspects: avidyä, ignorance, and pradhäna, primal matter. 

“Avidyä is related to the jéva, whereas the pradhäna is related to the external
material world. The inert matter of the material universe is produced out of the
pradhäna, and avidyä binds the jéva to the fruitive desires of material life.
Mäyä has another two features: vidyä, and avidyä, both of which are concerned
with jéva. Avidyä puts the jéva into his conditioned state of captivity, and
vidyä liberates him. When the imprisoned jéva strives after reunion with Kåñëa,
the vidyä principle is activated, bestowing spiritual realization. However, as
long as the jéva forgets Kåñëa, he is under the spell of avidyä. Brahma-jïäna,
cognizance of the Supreme, is a specific branch of the vidyä principle.
Manifesting within the spiritually awakening consciousness of the jéva, vidyä
has two phases. In her first phase, vidyä prompts pious deeds and a positive
spiritual endeavour, and in her second mature phase bestows realization of the
Supreme Truth. Avidyä clouds the consciousness of the jéva, and vidyä dissipates
the clouds.”

Vrajanätha, “How does the pradhäna function?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “When the pradhäna of the mäyä-çakti is agitated by the
potency of Çré Kåñëa in the form of käla, eternal time, the mahä-tattva, the
total material substance, is produced. Thus, when the pradhäna, an aspect of
mäyä, is stirred into motion by käla, matter comes into existence. Ahaìkära is
then manifested from a transformation of the mahä-tattva, and when ahaìkära is
transformed by tama-guëa, äkäça, ether, is produced. Äkäça is then transformed
into air, then air into fire, then fire into water, and then water into earth—in
this way the païca-mahäbhüta, the five gross elements of matter, come into
existence. Now listen carefully to how the païca-tanmätra, five sense objects,
respectively related to the païca-mahäbhüta, the five gross elements of matter,
are created. 

“Käla agitates the avidyä aspect of prakåti, material nature, to manifest the
humours of jïäna and karma within the mahä-tattva. Within the mahä-tattva, when
this element of karma is transformed by sattva-guëa, jïäna, cognizance, is
produced, and when räja-guëa acts upon karma, then kriyä, action, is produced. 

“As we have said before, the mahä-tattva is transformed to produce ahaìkära.
Ahaìkära, now vitiated by räja-guëa, transforms into buddhi. When buddhi is then
transformed, it produces the quality of çabda, sound, in the element äkäça. The
quality of çabda is then transformed into sparça, touch, the particular quality
of air. Thus, sparça is imbued with the particular qualities of both ether and
air, namely çabda and sparça respectively. Çabda and sparça are the matrices for
life, which are präëa, force, ojaù, vitality, and bala, strength. Next, sparça
is transformed into rüpa, form, which is the quality of the element tejäù, fire.
Thus, çabda and sparça are also present in rüpa, which is the particular quality
of tejäù. Next, rüpa is transformed into rasa, taste, the particular quality of
water. Thus, rasa also contains çabda, sparça, and rüpa. By further
transformation, gandha, smell, is produced as the particular quality of the
element earth, which thus also manifests the qualities of çabda, sparça, rüpa,
and rasa. The Supreme Puruña by his caitanya, consciousness, lends His requisite
support to this entire process of material transformations.

“Ahaìkära is of three kinds: vaikärikä, in goodness; taijasa, in passion; and
tämasa, in ignorance. Vaikärikä ahaìkära through its product mana, the mind,
manifests the material objects before the consciousness of jéva. Taijasa
ahaìkära produces the two types of senses, which are the païca-jïänendriya, the
five knowledge gathering sensual organs, and the païca-karmendriya, five working
sense organs. The païca-jïänendriya are the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and skin
(the sense of touch). The païca-karmendriya are the mouth, hands, legs, anus,
and reproductive organ. 

“In this manner all the material paraphernalia, both gross and subtle, are
manufactured, but until and unless they come into contact with the jéva, they
cannot be activated. When the jéva is placed by the glance of the Supreme Lord
into the material body of gross and subtle matter, then everything starts
working by the jéva’s presence and the supervision of the Lord. In this way, the
senses manifested by the modes of sattva and räja encounter the sense-objects
that the pradhäna has manifested through the mode of tama. All these elements
amalgamate and interact to form a suitable field for the material action of the
jéva. Avidyä and pradhäna work in this way. 

“The material nature thus consists of twenty-four elements: the païca-mahäbhüta,
the five gross elements: earth, water, fire, air and ether; and their
païca-tanmätra, five concomitant sense objects: smell, taste, form, touch, and
sound; plus, the just mentioned ten sense organs, which are the
païca-jïänendriya, the five knowledge gathering senses, and the
païca-karmendriya, five working senses; to these twenty are added: mana, the
mind; citta, heart (contaminated consciousness); buddhi, intelligence; and
ahaìkära, false ego—thus totalling twenty-four in all. The jéva is the
twenty-fifth principle and Paramätmä the twenty-sixth.”

Vrajanätha, “In what layout are subtle and gross matter present in this human
body, which measures three and a half cubits? Furthermore, where does the jéva
reside within the body?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The five gross elements, the five sense-objects, and
the ten sense organs comprise the gross body. Mind, contaminated consciousness,
intelligence, and false ego form the subtle body. The one who falsely identifies
with the body and stakes claims in relationship to the body, thus living under
false concepts of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ is the jéva, who is thus deprived of his true
svarüpa. The jéva, though infinitesimal, is transcendental to material time,
place, and the three modes; however, in spite of his minute stature, his
consciousness pervades the entire body. A touch of sandalwood paste applied to
any part of the body soothes the entire body, similarly, the tiny soul, the
jéva, is the kñetra-jïa, knower of his entire body, which is called the kñetra,
the field. Through this kñetra the jéva experiences the worldly joys and
sorrows.”

Vrajanätha, “If the jéva is the central figure performing karma and thus
experiencing the fruits of elation and distress, then to what extent does Éçvara
exercise control?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The jéva is the initiator of his karma, whereas Éçvara
bestows the fruits appropriate for that karma upon the jéva. Also Éçvara
arranges the resultant future karma of the jéva. Put simply, Éçvara is the
disburser of the fruits of karma and the jéva is the enjoyer of those fruits.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the different types of conditions experienced by the
deluded souls?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The spirit soul deluded by mäyä passes through five
distinct conditions: äcchädita-cetanä, covered consciousness; saìkucita-cetanä,
contracted consciousness; mukulita-cetanä, budding consciousness;
vikasita-cetanä, unfolded consciousness; and pürëa-vikasita-cetanä, full-blown
consciousness.”

Vrajanätha, “Which of the jévas belong to the category of äcchädita cetanä?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The jévas with the inert forms of trees, plants, or
rocks belong to this category. Consciousness is practically non-existent in
them. Having forgotten their eternal relationship as servants of Çré Kåñëa, they
have become so completely engrossed in matter that they are now unable to
perceive their spiritual self. These jévas are forced to accept and only know
the six transformations of birth, growth, maintenance, production of
by-products, dwindling, and death. They are practically inert and have not the
faintest recollection of their original self. 

“This condition reflects the most degraded state of consciousness of the jéva.
In the Puräëas the examples of Ahalyä, the Yamalärjuna trees, and the
saptatäla-våkña, the seven täla trees, shed more light on this topic. The jévas
are put into such a distressful condition as a result of abominable offences,
and only the mercy of Çré Kåñëa can release them from this state.”

Vrajanätha, “Who are in saìkucita-cetanä?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Birds, beasts, reptiles, aquatics and insects belong to
this category. Unlike the äcchädita-cetanä, whose perception of their own
consciousness is almost nil, these jévas are slightly aware of their
consciousness. They carry out activities like eating, sleeping, mating,
defending, moving according to their will, fighting with others when life or
ownership are jeopardized, and expressing anger upon seeing injustice done to
themselves. However, they do not have any knowledge of life after death or of
transcendence. 

“For example, in the mind of a monkey we see traces of primitive scientific
responses. They are slightly able to analyze consequences and possess a sense of
gratitude to a minute degree. These jévas to some extent may perceive the
differing properties of various material objects, but because they cannot
penetrate into the subject of Bhagavän, their consciousness is contracted. In
the scriptures there are descriptions of King Bhärata born as a deer, but still
remembering kåñëa-näma. This, of course, is a very special case, quite out of
the ordinary. King Bhärata and even King Någa received animal forms as a result
of serious offences, which were forgiven later by the mercy and blessings of the
Supreme Lord.” 

Vrajanätha, “Who are the mukulita-cetanä?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The conditioned jévas in human forms go through the
higher three phases of being; namely, mukulita-cetanä, budding consciousness;
vikasita-cetanä, unfolded blossoming consciousness; and pürëa-vikasita-cetanä,
fully blossomed consciousness. 

“Human beings may be divided into five categories: néti-çünya, lawless, immoral;
niréçvara-naitika, atheistic, but law-abiding and moralistic; seçvarä-naitika,
theistic and moralistic, sädhana-bhakta, devotee of Bhagavän, whose devotion is
tempered by rules and regulations; and bhäva-bhakta, a pure devotee whose love
and devotion to the Lord is spontaneous.

“Those human beings who—on account of a lack of knowledge, or perverted
knowledge—become atheists come under the category of néti-çünya or
niréçvara-naitika. Morality mixed with restricted faith in Bhagavän is the
hallmark of a seçvarä-naitika jéva. Those who strictly follow the rules of the
scriptures and are attracted to the devotional service of the Supreme Lord with
deepening faith are sädhana-bhaktas. Unlimited and spontaneous attraction and
attachment to the service of the Supreme Lord are the symptoms of a
bhäva-bhakta. 

“Néti-çünya and niréçvara-naitika human beings have mukulita-cetanä.
Seçvarä-naitika and sädhana-bhakta human beings possess vikasita-cetanä. Only
the bhäva-bhaktas are on the stage of pürëa-vikasita-cetanä.” 

Vrajanätha, “How long has the bhäva-bhakta to remain bound by the mäyä-çakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “This question will be dealt within our further
discussion of the seventh çloka of the daça-müla. It is now late, so let us stop
for now.”

Fully absorbed, Vrajanätha recapitulated to himself all the points he had just
heard on his way back home.

Thus ends the sixteenth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma:
Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana, Part Four: The Jéva Swallowed by Mäyä, the
Illusory Energy

JDH 17: Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Chapter Seventeen
Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Part Five: The Liberation of the Jéva from the Prison House of Mäyä

Vrajanätha listened impassively while his grandmother talked to him that night
about completing the final arrangements for his marriage ceremony. After supper,
he reclined upon his bed until late in the night, still pondering over the
status of the pure jéva. At the same time in another room, quite different
thoughts were keeping his aged grandmother awake, “How can I arouse his interest
in his matrimonial affairs—he seems so unconcerned.” However, the thoughts of
Vrajanätha’s grandmother were interrupted by the sudden arrival of the maternal
cousin of Vrajanätha, Vänimädhava. Vänimädhava had been assigned by Vijaya
Vidyäratna, the father of the prospective bride, to finalize the marriage
alliance between Vrajanätha and his daughter, who was also the paternal
cousin-sister of Vänimädhava.

Vänimädhava, “Granny, why delay? Please organize this marriage properly—it is up
to you.” 

Grandmother then expressed her own concern about the situation, “Dear boy, you
are such an expert in these matters, why don’t you speak to Vrajanätha and make
him understand that he must marry. Every time I bring the subject up, he remains
silent.”

Vänimädhava was short, with a stumpy neck, dark complexion and sly, dimly lit
eyes. He had the habit of ‘putting his finger in every pie,’ but managed somehow
or other to stay aloof or at least he pretended to do so. He quickly retorted,
“Granny, everything will come out fine. I am only waiting for your permission
and then I can start. You know already what I can accomplish—I can make money by
counting the waves upon the sea! Just let me get into this topic with
Vrajanätha. Ahh, yes! Granny, remember, you promised to stuff me full with all
those goodies of yours...?” 

Hearing from the grandmother that Vrajanätha was fast asleep, Vänimädhava
decided to leave and return the next day. Early the next morning he showed up
carrying a loöä, a small kettle-shaped water vessel, for his ablutions. From the
house, Vrajanätha entered the courtyard where Vänimädhava was waiting and sat
down upon the Chandi-maëòapa platform in front of the family Devé temple. Seeing
Vänimädhava, he spoke with mild surprise, “My dear brother, what brings you here
so early?”

Vänimädhava got straight to the point, “Dear elder brother, you have spent a
long time studying and teaching the nyäya scriptures. Your father, Haranätha
Cüòämaëi, was a renowned scholar and now you are famous as a paëòita. Yet, have
you considered that you are also the sole male in your household? Who will
inherit these large holdings if you have no male descendent? Big brother, it is
the earnest desire of everyone that you marry.”

Vrajanätha, “Dear brother, why do you trouble me without cause? Since I am
nowadays associating with the followers of Çré Gauräìga, I have no intention of
entering household life. Family life does not attract me. Having learned to
experience immense exultation in the company of the Vaiñëava sädhus in Mäyäpura,
I will either take sannyäsa, embracing the robe of the renunciate, or at least
take full shelter of the feet of the Vaiñëavas. I reveal these facts to you
because I consider you a close friend and would ask you to keep them to
yourself.”

Judging Vrajanätha’s mood, Vänimädhava thought that a straightforward, simple
approach would not favour his mission and thus he decided to take a more devious
course. Masking his inner feelings, he said slyly, “I am here to assist you in
anything you want. When you were a student I carried your books to school and
back, now that you are about to take the sannyäsa äçrama, I will carry your
staff and water-pot.”

Hiding their real feelings, men of cunning possess double tongues. They say one
thing to one person and twist it around for another, thus causing considerable
chaos and contention. Their words are sugar-coated, but their hearts are black
with poison. Hearing the sweet sympathy of Vänimädhava and feeling encouraged to
trust him, Vrajanätha said, “Dear brother, I always knew you as a well-wishing
and hearty friend. You see, my grandmother is an old-fashioned matriarch; she
has no knowledge about the serious facts of life, renunciation and so on. Since
discovering someone she thinks would be a good bride for me, she has been
scheming tirelessly to drag me into the inferno of family life. If you can
persuade her to desist from this plan, I shall remain forever indebted to you.”

Vänimädhava responded, “As long as Çarmaräma, the great arbitrator, is present,
no one can force you to act against your will. Elder brother, please open your
heart to me and tell me honestly why you have developed such a strong aversion
for household-life, so that I will be able to defend you vigorously. Who has
advised you to embrace renunciation?”

Vrajanätha entrusted Vänimädhava candidly with the whole story of the respected
elder, Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, the mentor to whom he fled every evening, who was
extremely merciful and expert in soothing and cooling the burning pangs of
material existence.

Being a crooked man with sinister designs, Vänimädhava conspired within himself,
“Now I have it, now I know his weakness. I will have to make some devious
manoeuvres to get him back upon the right track.” Yet, aloud he said, “Elder
brother, I will gradually convince grandmother to give up her plans for your
marriage, but first I must return to my house.”

Vänimädhava started out in the direction of his home, but soon turned around
towards Çréväsäìgana, Mäyäpura. Arriving there, he sat down under the fragrant
bakula tree, saying to himself in a critical mood, “These good-for-nothing
Vaiñëavas are the real enjoyers in this world. They live in nice surroundings
with blossoming flowers, green shady bowers and wide, clean courtyards. Each has
his own bhajana-kuöéra to chant japa away from the public eye. And that is all
they have to do. They live like kings, and God-fearing people, especially the
pious ladies, upon their return from purificatory baths in the Gaìgä always
bring them fruits, milk and so on—such an easy life! Earlier the caste brähmaëas
were able to direct this flow of bounty into their own larders by
institutionalising karma-käëòa performances, but the bäbäjés have now outwitted
them and become the latest rage.

“O Kali-yuga, I salute you! You protect your followers and allow them to live
off the fat of the land. Coming here has opened up my eyes. Alas! My birth in an
elevated aristocratic Kuléna brähmaëa family is to no avail, because today no
one offers us even a glass of water, what to speak of fruits. These charlatan
Vaiñëavas accuse the scholarly logicians of using word jugglery simply for the
discussion of material objects, calling them fools. However, even after having
studied this science of logic thoroughly, my elder brother Vrajanätha has begun
to accept the words of these Vaiñëavas. That would appear to be it: He is an
unfortunate victim who has fallen into their mischievous clutches. I am
Vänimädhava; I will set Vrajanätha aright and teach these crooks in loincloths a
lesson.”

Vänimädhava stopped spewing out mental venom, strolled over to one of the huts
and entered. By coincidence, it was the hut of the elderly Raghunätha däsa
Bäbäjé, who was sitting on a simple hand-made mat chanting japa. The face being
a mirror of the mind, Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé saw that Kali-yuga in the form of
this young brähmaëa boy had entered the hut. Very humble by nature, Vaiñëavas
consider themselves at all times to be lower than a piece of straw. They
tolerate the taunts of inimical persons, wishing them only the best. Though
uninterested in seeking respect for themselves, they are always respectful to
others. Therefore, Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé endearingly asked Vänimädhava to be
seated.

Vänimädhava was a deadly hater of the Vaiñëavas. Ignorant of the status of a
Vaiñëava, he pompously concluded that the elderly Bäbäjé was a çüdra and made a
gesture of blessing him by showing him the palm of his hand. Raghunätha däsa
Bäbäjé enquired, “Son, what is your name? And what brings you here?” In doing
so, he addressed Vänimädhava with the more familiar and casual tumi, not with
the more respectful äpni. Enraged at this, Vänimädhava replied with an
undignified sneer, “Hey you Bäbäjé, do you think that by just wearing a kaupéna,
you are now on equal terms with a brähmaëa. Apart from that, I would like to
know whether or not you are acquainted with Vrajanätha Nyäya-païcänana?” All the
while Vänimädhava used the familiar tumi.

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Kindly forgive my offences and overlook the defects in
the language of an old man. Yes, Vrajanätha blesses us sometimes with his
presence.”

Vänimädhava, “That man is not as simple as you think he is. He will visit you
regularly for some time to win your confidence and then after observing your
practices carry out his own plans. The Belapukuriyä brähmaëa community is
antagonistic towards you Vaiñëavas and have selected Vrajanätha to come here and
find out more about your way of life. You are an elderly man; you should be
careful with him. I will visit you from time to time and tell you all about
their devious plans against you and your friends. A note of caution, for your
own good, Vrajanätha must not know I was here. I will take my leave now.”
Vänimädhava sidled off in the direction of his home.

After lunch, Vänimädhava visited Vrajanätha and in the course of their
conversation said casually, “Elder brother, I went to Mäyäpura on some work this
morning and unexpectedly met a very aged Vaiñëava, I think he was called
Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé. We exchanged a few courteous words and came to speak
about you. He mentioned something so despicable about you that I was
shocked—never before have I heard anyone speak such castigating words about a
brähmaëa. Finally he said that he would feed you with the contaminated remnants
of all the lower castes and thereby demote you from your brahminical position.
What a shame! If a paëòita like yourself is insulted and you continue to visit
him, this will blacken the good name of the entire brähmaëa community.”

Vrajanätha was shocked to hear Vänimädhava speak in this manner. Vrajanätha had
developed firm faith and trust in the Vaiñëavas and a growing devotion to
Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé. Suddenly and for no recognizable reason, all these
feelings became much stronger. Vrajanätha turned to Vänimädhava, saying,
“Brother, today I am busy. Tomorrow, we can discuss all this at leisure; you had
better go home now.”

Vänimädhava left quietly. Vrajanätha was well aware of Vänimädhava’s
double-faced character and although he had studied extensively the polemical
methods of logic and rhetoric he disliked dishonest ways. He had revealed his
intimate thoughts about accepting renunciation because of Vänimädhava’s alleged
willingness to assist him in entering the sannyäsa äçrama. Nonetheless, now he
understood Vänimädhava’s deeper malicious motives. Furthermore, it occurred to
him that Vänimädhava’s scheming intrigues may have been prompted ultimately by
some expected personal gain in the matter of his marriage. In addition the visit
to Mäyäpura might have been made with the intention of sowing seeds of
dissension. Vrajanätha clasped his hands and earnestly prayed to the Lord, “O
Lord, let my faith in the guru and the Vaiñëavas become fixed and unshakable and
not be reduced by the wiles of materialists and cheaters.” After being absorbed
in philosophical deliberations until late afternoon, at sunset Vrajanätha set
out eagerly for Çréväsäìgana.

After Vänimädhava had left the hut of Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, the elderly Bäbäjé
thought that his visitor was a brahma-räkñasa, a very powerful demon: …räkñasäù
kalim-äçritya jäyante brahma-yoniñu… “The demoniac persons will take shelter of
Kali-yuga to multiply and be born as brähmaëas.” This description properly fits
my visitor. He is arrogant, proud of his brähmaëa caste, insolent in behaviour,
inimical to the Vaiñëavas, and a hypocrite making a show of religiosity. This is
written all over his face. His narrow shoulders, dim and sly eyes, and cunning
circumlocution reflect his black heart. What a striking distinction between the
two! Vrajanätha has a lovely nature, and this man takes after the Devil himself.
O my Çré Kåñëa! O Çré Gauräìga, please protect me from evil, so I may never have
to associate with such men. I must warn Vrajanätha against the devious ways of
this vicious man.”

When Vrajanätha came that evening, Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé’s affection, which had
now greatly increased, encompassed and welcomed him during their greeting
embrace. Considerably moved, Vrajanätha fell at his feet, his eyes brimming with
tears. He remained silent out of shame while Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé began, “I
was visited this morning by a dark-complexioned brähmaëa youth who made certain
provocative remarks, do you know this person?”

Vrajanätha, “Dear master, if I may repeat your own words, there are many sorts
of human beings, some of whom are so perverted that they enjoy causing anxiety
to others. Vänimädhava—I hesitate to add the prefix ‘brother’—is a prime example
of this kind. I would prefer not to mention him anymore. His main business is to
criticize you in my presence and to blame me in your company, hoping to wedge
with falsities and lies a rift in our friendship. I hope you were not offended
by this upstart.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “O Kåñëa! O Gauräìga! I am fortunate to have been in the
service of Vaiñëavas for a long time and by their mercy, I am able to judge
between a Vaiñëava and a non-devotee. As I have properly assessed everything
that happened today, you may drop the topic.”

Vrajanätha, “All right dear master, let us forget that fellow. Kindly tell me
how the conditioned soul may attain liberation.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “We find the answer to this question in the seventh
çloka of the Daça-müla-çikñä:

yadä bhrämaà bhrämaà hari-rasa-galad-vaiñëava-janaà
kadäcit sampaçyan tad-anugamane syäd ruci-yutaù
tadä kåñëävåtyä tyajati çanakair mäyika-daçäà
svarüpaà bibhräëo vimala-rasa-bhogaà sa kurute 

“‘The conditioned jéva travels high and low throughout the material universe
from one species of life to another. When he associates with a Vaiñëava saint,
who is saturated in the flowing rasa of devotion to Çré Hari, he gradually
develops ruci for serving the Lord and following the Vaiñëava way of life. By
chanting kåñëa-näma the jéva becomes purified of his material contamination;
thus his svarüpa begins to manifest more and more, and he gradually attains
eligibility to relish the nectarous rasa of çuddha-bhakti to Çré Kåñëa.’”

Vrajanätha, “Master, please cite a few verses from the Vedas to substantiate
this çloka.” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Both the Muëòaka Upaniñad, 3.1.2, and Svetäçvatara
Upaniñad, 4.7, repeat the same çloka:

samäne våkñe puruño nimagno
néçäya çocati muhyamänaù
juñöaà yadä paçyati anyam éçam
asya mahimänam iti véta-çokaù

“‘Although the two birds are in the same tree, the eating bird, the jéva, is
fully engrossed with anxiety and moroseness as the enjoyer of the fruits of the
tree. However, if in some way or other he turns to his friend the Lord and knows
His glories, the suffering bird becomes immediately free from all anxieties.’”

Vrajanätha, “Do the words, ‘If he turns to his friend the Lord and knows His
glories, the suffering bird becomes immediately free from all anxieties,’
describe the liberation of the jéva?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The termination of the jéva’s captivity within mäyä is
called mukti, which the person who associates with pure devotees is sure to
attain. However, most importantly, one should consider the details of the
status, which the jéva attains after mukti. The Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 2.10.6,
declares: 

muktir hitvänyathä rüpaà
sva-rüpeëa vyavasthitiù

“‘Mukti is the permanent situation of the living entity in his svarüpa,
constitutional transcendental form, after giving up the changeable gross and
subtle material bodies.’

“According to this verse, the jéva must give up the coverings that are his
material bodily forms and become permanently situated in his svarüpa. As soon as
the chains of captivity are cut, the process of mukti for the jéva ceases. Then
the eternal and endless engagement of the jéva in his svarüpa, which is the
prayojana of the jéva, begins. The state of complete elimination of material
suffering may also be called mukti, but the sublime, spiritual bliss that the
liberated jéva experiences by devotional activity upon the spiritual platform
far transcends the relief felt by the cessation of material entanglement. 

“The Chändogya Upaniñad, 8.12.3, describes:

evam evaiña samprasädo’smäc charérät samutthäya 
paraà jyoti-rüpa-sampadya svena rüpenäbhiniñpadyate
sa uttamaù puruñaù sa tatra paryeti jakñan kréòan ramamäëaù

“‘The liberated jéva transcends the confines of his gross and subtle material
bodies and acquires a spiritual form luminescent with transcendental lustre.
This is his intrinsic, supramundane identity. He is a perfect being and resides
in the spiritual world relishing sublime activities and divine bliss at every
moment.’”

Vrajanätha, “What are the symptoms of a jévan-mukta, liberated soul?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Chändogya Upaniñad, 8.7.1, mentions eight symptoms:

ya ätmäpahatä-päpmä vijaro vimåtyur viçoko ‘vijighatso 
‘pipäsaù satya-kämaù satya-saìkalpaù so ‘nveñöavyaù

“‘A person should search out a jévan-mukta, who is seen to possess these eight
symptoms: apahata-päpa, free from all sinful activity and the nescience of mäyä;
vijara, free from the miseries of old age and decay; vimåtyu, has conquered
death and rebirth; viçoka, is beyond material happiness and distress;
vijighatsa, no longer desires material enjoyment; apipätä, has no desire other
than the service of the Lord; satya-käma, whose desires are always faultless and
directed to the Supreme Truth, Kåñëa; and satya-saìkalpa, whose wishes are
always fulfilled by the grace of Kåñëa.’”

Vrajanätha, “The seventh çloka of the Daça-müla mentions that after wandering
through many species of life the fortunate soul meets a pure Vaiñëava devotee
filled with kåñëa-prema and this event brings about the highest benediction of
the jéva. My first question is: Is it not true that the practice and cultivation
of brahma-jïäna, añtanga-yoga, and other pious auspicious activities ultimately
lead one to the attainment of devotion to Çré Hari?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Here are the Supreme Lord’s own words from the Çrémad
Bhägavatam, 11.12.1-2: 

çré-bhagavän uväca

na rodhayati mäà yogo
na säìkhyaà dharma eva ca
na svädhyäyas tapas tyägo
neñöä-pürtaà na dakñiëä

vratäni yajïaç chandäàsi
térthäni niyamä yamäù
yathävarundhe sat-saìgaù
sarva-saìgäpaho hi mäm

“‘The Supreme Personality of Godhead said, “My dear Uddhava, by associating with
My pure devotees one can destroy one’s attachment for all objects of material
sense gratification. The devotion developed in such purifying association brings
Me under the control of My devotee. One may perform the añtanga-yoga system,
engage in philosophical analysis of the elements of material nature, practice
non-violence and other ordinary principles of piety, chant the Vedas, perform
penances, take to the renounced order of life, execute sacrificial performances
and dig wells, plant trees and perform other public welfare activities, give in
charity, carry out severe vows, worship the devas, chant confidential mantras,
visit holy places or accept major and minor disciplinary injunctions, but even
by performing all such activities one does not bring Me under his control.’ 

“The purport is that none of these practices is as potent spiritually in
attracting the mercy of the Supreme Lord as is sädhu-saìga. The añtanga-yoga
path and other such practices just mentioned please the Lord only superficially,
unlike sädhu-saìga, which pleases Him fully. In another text, the
Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya, 8.51, this statement is found:

yasya yat-saìgatiù puàso
maëivat syät sa tad-guëaù
säkula-dvaitato dhimän
sva-yüthyän eva saàçrayet

“‘A person gradually acquires the characteristics of the company he keeps, much
like a gem stone which lends some of its own colour and sparkle to other
substances in touch with it. Therefore a person can become a pure devotee in the
saintly association of pure devotees.’

“Sadhu-saìga brings blessings to all the living entities. The scriptures advise
niùsaìga, to live without companions. This means one should give up contact with
worldly-minded people and only seek the saintly company of Vaiñëavas. Even
accidental association with pure devotees without knowledge of the benefit
brings good fortune, as declared in the Çrémad Bhägavatam, 3.23.56:

saìgo yaù saàsåter hetur
asatsu vihito ’dhiyä
sa eva sädhuñu kåto
niùsaìgatväya kalpate

“‘Desiring companionship for sense gratification is certainly the path to
bondage. Yet, the same act of association with saintly persons leads to the path
of liberation, even if performed without knowledge.’

“Further, Çrémad Bhägavatam, 7.5.32:

naisam matis tavad urukramanghrim
sprsaty anarthapagamo yad-arthah
mahiyasam pada-rajo “bhisekam
niskincananam na vrnita yavat 

“‘Unless they smear upon their bodies the dust of the lotus feet of a Vaiñëava
completely free from material contamination, persons very much inclined towards
materialistic life cannot be attached to the lotus feet of the Lord, who is
glorified for His uncommon activities. Only by becoming Kåñëa conscious and
taking shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord one can be freed from material
contamination.’

“Further, Çrémad Bhägavatam, 10.48.31:

na hy am-mayäni térthäni
na devä måc-chilä-mayäù
te punanty uru-kälena
darçanäd eva sädhavaù 

“‘Only after a long period of worshiping Gaìgä devé, the holy places of
pilgrimage, and the earthen and marble deity forms of the devas, is the soul of
such a worshiper sanctified, whereas an unalloyed devotee of the Lord purifies
any person simply by giving a moment’s association through his mere presence.’

“Further, Çrémad Bhägavatam, 10.51.53:

bhaväpavargo bhramato yadä bhavej
janasya tarhy acyuta sat-samägamaù
sat-saìgamo yarhi tadaiva sad-gatau
parävareçe tvayi jäyate matiù 

“‘O, Acyuta! O, Supreme Being! O, One who is eternally fixed in His original
identity! O, infallible One! The jéva is eternally caught in the continuous
cycle of birth and death. When the time for his release from this vicious cycle
comes, he first attains the association of saintly persons. Right from that
moment, he develops attachment to Your lotus feet. You are the Lord of both the
material and the spiritual worlds and the shelter for the saintly souls.’

“Vrajanätha my boy, the eternally conditioned soul has been crucified on the
karma-cakra, the cycle of fruitive action, since time immemorial. He wanders in
the material universe from one species of life to another, sometimes as a deva
and sometimes as a beast. However, if—on the strength of previous sukåti,
accumulated over many life-times—he meets a pure elevated devotee of the Lord,
he develops attraction to serve the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa.”

Vrajanätha, “Master, you say that sukåti brings a person into contact with a
saintly soul. What is sukåti? Is it a part of karma or jïäna?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “According to the scriptures, pious auspicious
activities are called sukåti. They are of two varieties: bhakti-pravartaka, that
which invokes devotional service to the Supreme Lord; and
aväntara-phala-pravartaka, that which gives extraneous material results. The
fruitive activities and pursuit of empirical knowledge in the säìkhya philosophy
are examples of sukåti producing extraneous results. Yet, saintly association;
dhäma-yatra, spiritually enlivening pilgrimages; observing devotional vows; and
so on, are bhakti-pravartaka and generate eternal devotion to Çré Kåñëa. On the
other hand, avantara-phala-pravartika sukåti gives temporary material results
and then exhausts its effect.

“All materially meritorious deeds—giving charity, performing austerity,
etc.—reward us with sense gratification. In addition, by realization of Brahman
through monistic empirical knowledge, one achieves the sukåti that bestows
impersonal mukti. However, none of these sukåtis can generate attachment for
devotional service. On the other hand, seeking the company of pure devotees;
observing vows conducive to devotional service such as Ekädaçé, Janmäñöamé (the
appearance day of Çré Kåñëa) and Gaura-pürëimä (the appearance day of Çré Kåñëa
Caitanya); offering service to Tulasé devé; honouring mahä-prasäda, the
sanctified food remnants of Çré Kåñëa; circumambulation of the temple of Çré
Viñëu; and worshiping the holy dhäma are all bhakti-pravartaka sukåti.”

Vrajanätha, “If a person who is afflicted by the pangs of material existence and
is thus desirous to end his suffering—which is caused by nescience—directly and
earnestly approaches the shelter of the lotus feet of Çré Hari in order to
surrender himself, will he not be awarded with bhakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “By his power of discrimination a person may become
conscious of the distress inflicted upon him by Mäyädevé and comprehend that
material life is unreal and contaminating. However, only upon realizing that the
lotus feet of the Supreme Lord and His unalloyed intimate devotees are his sole
sanctuaries, and then single-mindedly endeavouring to surrender to the Lord
through the medium of His pure devotees will the sincere soul properly realize
the protective association of sädhus engrossed in kåñëa-prema. This sublime
sädhu-saìga then bestows the prime devotional sukåti, giving the aspirant the
greatest blessing—attainment of the lotus feet of Çré Hari.

“The jéva’s initial mood of renunciation and state of awakening consciousness
play an indirect, secondary role as stepping stones towards his ultimate
devotional goal. However, sädhu-saìga is an indispensable need and is thus the
principal means to attain çuddha-bhakti at the lotus feet of Çré Kåñëa.”

Vrajanätha, “If we place karma, pious works; jïäna, empirical knowledge;
vairägya, renunciation; and viveka, discrimination, as the secondary causes for
bhakti, why do we not call them bhakti-pravartaka sukåti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “We have strong reservations against accepting this
opinion. The results of these secondary causes are extraneous to the real goal,
most often becoming redundant and ineffective after being awarded. Karma pushes
the jéva into the pool of material enjoyment, dries it up, and then leaves.
Vairägya and viveka may elevate the jéva only up to the non-dual Brahman
realization, but are generally inadequate to elevate him further. The monistic,
non-dual Brahman realization, by its impersonal nature usually deprives the jéva
from receiving shelter at the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord. Therefore, these
performances cannot be assertively termed bhakti-pravartaka sukåti. Rarely they
may elevate someone to the doors of bhakti—but that is the exception, not the
rule. Sadhu-saìga, on the other hand, has no irrelevant side effects; it heaves
the devotee to the highest realization, prema, as confirmed in the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 3.25.25:

satäà prasaìgän mama vérya-saàvido
bhavanti håt-karëa-rasäyanäù kathäù
taj-joñaëäd äçv apavarga-vartmani
çraddhä ratir bhaktir anukramiñyati

“‘In the association of pure devotees, discussion of the pastimes and activities
of the Supreme Lord is very pleasing and satisfying to the ear and the heart. By
cultivating such knowledge one gradually advances along the path of liberation,
thereafter one is freed, and one’s attraction becomes fixed. Then real devotion
and devotional service begin.’”

Vrajanätha, “Thus sädhu-saìga is established as the only
bhakti-pravartaka-sukåti. How about the procedure? Is the hearing of hari-kathä
from the sädhus then followed by the attainment of bhakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Very well, I will explain the development step by
step—listen carefully. While wandering through the different species of life, a
jéva upon attaining birth as a human being must perform providentially or
otherwise bhakti-pravartaka-sukåti in the form of any one of the limbs of pure
devotional service, such as fasting on Ekädaçé, or on other spiritually
important occasions; visiting and respecting the holy places of the pastimes of
the Supreme Lord; or hearing kértana from the lips of a renounced and humble
Vaiñëava sädhu. However, those persons who purposely desire bhukti and mukti
will not get the benefits of bhakti-pravartaka-sukåti, even by performing any of
these activities. In contrast, if an innocent person, even one devoid of
philosophical understanding, performs these activities by accident, by chance,
or by social custom without desiring bhukti and mukti, he obtains the results of
bhakti-pravartaka-sukåti. 

“When such sukåti has been accumulated over many lifetimes, it generates a force
that creates çraddhä, which is defined as faith in the practice of
çuddha-bhakti. This çraddhä then gives birth to the desire to associate with
pure devotees, which is sädhu-saìga. Thereafter, this sädhu-saìga inspires a
gradual increase in bhajana, which initially is the cultivation of
sädhana-bhakti, such as meditation and chanting.

“Bhajana destroys the unwanted material desires in the heart, known as anarthas.
When the anarthas are uprooted, çraddhä is transformed into niñöhä, unflinching
faith. Through gradual purification, niñöhä increasingly generates ruci, taste
for bhakti. Ruci then reveals the sublime beauty of bhakti and is converted into
äsakti, strong attachment for bhakti. When äsakti fully blossoms, bhäva (also
known as rati), loving spiritual emotion, floods the heart. All the different
bhävas in concert create rasa, spiritual mellow, finally leading to kåñëa-prema.

“The point is that the jéva with sufficient bhakti-sukåti upon seeing a sädhu
develops the inclination to associate with such çuddha-bhaktas and follow their
example. The essential conclusion is that the first stage of contact with a
sädhu creates çraddhä in the heart. This çraddhä then inspires the jéva to see
and approach the sädhus in a new light; the aspiring jéva now sees the sädhus as
his gurus. This is the second stage of sädhu-saìga. Another term for this
increased level of çraddhä is çaraëäpatti, surrender. The first stage of
sädhu-saìga is defined as coming into circumstantial contact with Çré Hari’s
sacred places, festival days, paraphernalia, and çuddha-bhaktas; and thereby
becoming a recipient of mercy. The Bhagavad-gétä, 18.66, describes çaraëäpatti,
the result of the first stage of sädhu-saìga, in the following verse:

sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù 

“‘Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto me. I shall deliver
you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.’

“These ‘all varieties of religion’ include smarta, añtanga-yoga, säìkhya, jïäna,
vairägya, etc., which are all naimittika-dharma. Abandoning them has to be
accompanied by the proper realization that such performances will never bestow
prayojana, the prime necessity of human existence. The Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa,
the Hero of Vraja, the embodiment of eternity, absolute knowledge and bliss is
the sole goal of human existence. Knowing this, the jéva must relinquish the
desire for the bhukti and mukti of naimittika-dharma and practice çaraëäpatti to
Çré Kåñëa. This is real çraddhä. When the heart of the jéva is controlled by
such çraddhä, he sheds tears of remorse and applies himself to following a pure
Vaiñëava sädhu. Thus at this second stage, sädhu-saìga brings the jéva to the
point of finding the shelter of a guru.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the different anarthas of the jéva?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “There are four types of anarthas: sva-svarüpa apräpti,
ignorance about one’s own true identity; asat-tåñëä, hankering after illusory
phenomena; aparädha, offences; and hådaya-daurbalyaà, weakness and hesitancy of
the heart.

“When the jéva forgets that he is a minute, pure, transcendental part and parcel
of Çré Kåñëa, and the eternal servitor of Çré Kåñëa, he becomes materially
entrapped and oblivious of his true spiritual identity. This is the first
anartha of the jéva, known as sva-svarüpa apräpti. Next, the jéva, identifying
himself with the material body, becomes attached to material objects and
projecting his ego onto them he desires to enjoy and exploit them to gain
illusory, fleeting pleasures. Thus, the jéva wallows in the second anartha known
as asat-tåñëä, hankering after illusory phenomena, which is divided into the
three categories of such material desire: putra-éçänä, for sons; vitta-éçänä,
for wealth; and svarga-éçänä, for paradise. The aparädhas are ten in number—they
will be discussed in detail later. Finally, the results of hådaya-daurbalyaà are
grief and distress, plus a host of other problems.

“These four types of anarthas are the concomitant results of the nescience that
covers the jéva. By following the process of devotional service to Çré Kåñëa in
the association of pure devotees, these anarthas are gradually annulled. The
path of yoga—consisting of the four parts: pratyähära, withdrawal from
sense-objects; yama, self-control; niyama, restraint; and vairägya,
renunciation—is not a means to free oneself from material anxiety, for it cannot
award ultimate perfection and is filled with problems and the danger of falldown
and failure. To become ultimately purified by this path is only a most distant
possibility. 

“On the other hand, the method of çuddha-bhakti in sädhu-saìga is easy to follow
and totally immune to the ravages of anxiety. The material involvement of the
jéva is reduced to the same extent as his anarthas are decreased, and his
material attachments and coverings recede as his svarüpa is re-established.”

Vrajanätha, “May the jévas who are free from anarthas be called liberated?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Consider these verses from the Çrémad-Bhägavatam,
6.14.3-5:

rajobhiù sama-saìkhyätäù
pärthivair iha jantavaù
teñäà ye kecanehante
çreyo vai manujädayaù

“‘In this material world there are as many living entities as there are atoms.
Among these living entities, a very few are human beings, and among them, few
are interested in following religious principles.’

räyo mumukñavas teñäà
kecanaiva dvijottama
mumukñüëäà sahasreñu
kaçcin mucyeta sidhyati

“‘O best of the brähmaëas, Çukadeva Gosvämé, out of many persons who follow
religious principles, only a few desire liberation from the material world.
Among many thousands who desire liberation, one may actually achieve liberation,
giving up material attachment to society, friendship, love, country, home, wife
and children. And among many thousands of such liberated persons, one who can
understand the true meaning of liberation is very rare.’

muktänäm api siddhänäà
näräyaëa-paräyaëaù
sudurlabhaù praçäntätmä
koöiñv api mahä-mune

“‘O great sage, among many millions who are liberated and perfect in knowledge
of liberation, one may be a devotee of Çré Näräyaëa, or Çré Kåñëa. Such devotees
who are fully peaceful are extremely rare.’

“One who is free from anarthas is a çuddha-bhakta, a very rare personality
indeed. Even amongst many millions of liberated persons, a çuddha-bhakta of Çré
Kåñëa is rarely found. Therefore, there is not a more extraordinary saìga in
this world than that with a çuddha-bhakta of Çré Kåñëa.”

Vrajanätha, “Is the term Vaiñëava only applied to the gåha-tyägé, renounced
order of Vaiñëavas?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “A çuddha-bhakta of Çré Kåñëa is a Vaiñëava. It matters
not whether he is a householder or a renunciate, a brähmaëa or a caëòäla, a
wealthy person or a poor man. The measure of his çuddha-bhakti to Çré Kåñëa is
the degree of his elevation in Kåñëa consciousness and his position as a
Vaiñëava.” 

Vrajanätha, “You said earlier that the conditioned jévas within the material
world display five levels of consciousness. And that bhaktas either on the stage
of sädhana-bhakti or bhäva-bhakti are counted amongst those who are under the
subjugation of mäyä. At what stage of devotional development is a bhakta
considered mäyä-mukta, liberated from mäyä?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “As soon as the jéva is initiated into çuddha-bhakti, he
receives the designation mäyä-mukta jéva, a liberated soul. However, he is only
truly emancipated from the subjugation of mäyä when he has fully matured in
sädhana-bhakti. Prior to this maturity, the jéva is only liberated to the extent
he has attained svarüpa-gata-mäyä-mukti, awareness of his constitutional
spiritual nature and liberation from false ego. Vastu-gata-mäyä-mukti, complete
liberation, takes place when the jéva is completely freed from his gross and
subtle material bodies and established in his svarüpa and transcendental
service. Sincere adherence to the process of sädhana-bhakti ignites at some
stage the spark of bhäva-bhakti. If the flame of bhäva-bhakti is kept burning
and the jéva has thus become firmly fixed in this elevated state of spiritual
consciousness, then at the time of leaving the gross body, his subtle body will
also dissolve and he will obtain his pure transcendental svarüpa and
transcendental service. 

“The material conditioning of the jéva remains therefore throughout the period
of sädhana-bhakti, even spilling over into the beginning stage of bhäva-bhakti,
though only residual amounts persist. Therefore, the authorities in our line
have included sädhana-bhakti and bhäva-bhakti within the five levels of
consciousness considered mäyä-kavalita, under the influence of mäyä. The gross
materialist seeking bhukti and the jïäné seeking mukti most certainly also
belong to these five levels.

“Amongst those souls who are liberated, complete emancipation from subservience
to mäyä is only eventually accomplished by those jévas blessed with
çuddha-bhakti to Çré Hari. The imprisonment of the jéva began when the jéva
forgot his position as the eternal servant of Çré Kåñëa. This forgetfulness is
the original offence of the jéva and is the root of all the jéva’s subsequent
offences. Only the mercy of Çré Kåñëa can forgive all these offences and nothing
else. Therefore, the mercy of Çré Kåñëa is alone the indispensable instrument
that can fully release the jéva from the captivity of mäyä.

“The monistic philosophers cultivating empirical knowledge are under the false
impression that just by acquiring knowledge one can attain mukti. However, it is
impossible to attain complete mukti without the benediction of Çré Kåñëa. In the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 10.2.32-33, this point is explained:

ye ’nye ’ravindäkña vimukta-mäninas
tvayy asta-bhäväd aviçuddha-buddhayaù
äruhya kåcchreëa paraà padaà tataù
patanty adho ’nädåta-yuñmad-aìghrayaù

“‘O lotus-eyed one, those who think they are liberated in this life, but do not
render devotional service to You, must be of impure intelligence. Although they
accept severe austerities and penances, and rise to the spiritual position, to
the impersonal Brahman realization, they fall down again because they neglect to
worship Your lotus feet.’

tathä na te mädhava tävakäù kvacid
bhraçyanti märgät tvayi baddha-sauhådäù
tvayäbhiguptä vicaranti nirbhayä
vinäyakänékapa-mürdhasu prabhu

“‘O Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mädhava! Your intimate and surrendered
devotees are held captive by the bonds of love they have for Your lotus feet.
Hence, they are not afraid of falling down from the path of bhakti, unlike those
who proudly consider themselves as vimukta-mäninas, liberated. O Lord, Your
devotees are so well protected by You that they dauntlessly dance on the heads
of those who try to hinder them.’”

Vrajanätha, “How many types of mäyä-mukta jévas are there?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Initially, there are two types of mäyä-mukta jévas: the
nitya-mukta jévas, eternally liberated souls; and the baddha-mukta jévas, those
who have attained liberation from their previous conditioned, material
existence. The nitya-mukta jévas were never captured by mäyä. They are
categorized into two groups: nitya-mukta jévas who are aiçvarya-gata, engrossed
in the opulence of the Lord in a reverential mood; and those who are saturated
in mädhurya-gata, the nectarean moods of the divine conjugal love of Çré Çré
Rädhä Kåñëa.

“The aiçvarya-gata-nitya-mukta jévas are the nitya-pärñadäs of Çré Näräyaëa, the
presiding Lord of Vaikuëöha. They are the particles of the spiritual effulgence
emanating from Çré Müla-Saìkarñaëa, who resides in Vaikuëöha. 

“The mädhurya-gata-nitya-mukta jévas are the nitya-pärñadäs of Çré Kåñëa, the
Lord of Vraja-våndävana. They are the particles of the spiritual effulgence
emanating from the body of Çré Balaräma, who is situated in Goloka Våndävana.

“The baddha-mukta jévas after the attainment of mukti are of three types:
aiçvarya-gata, those steeped in the opulences of the Lord; mädhurya-gata, those
absorbed by the sweetness of the Lord; and brahma-jyotir-gata, those who
meditate upon the impersonal brahma-jyotir effulgence of the Lord. 

“The jévas who in their period of sädhana were inclined to the reverential moods
of bhakti in aiçvarya were elevated to the planets of Çré Näräyaëa in Vaikuëöha
as the associates of His nitya-pärñadäs. Those jévas who in their period of
sädhana were attracted to the intimate moods of bhakti in mädhurya became the
eternal residents of Çré Kåñëa’s Goloka Våndävana and now relish nectarine rasa
as the associates of Çré Kåñëa and His nitya-pärñadäs. However, those jévas who
sought to merge into the non-dual Absolute Brahman and as a result have attained
säyujya-mukti after death are in the debilitated situation of brahma-säyujya,
amalgamation into the impersonal brahma-jyotir.”

Vrajanätha, “What is the final destination of those who worship Çré Gauräìga?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Çré Kåñëa and Çré Gauräìga are non-different in terms
of tattva; they are the same Absolute Truth and both are the fountainheads of
madhura-rasa, nectarean, honey-like mellows. However, there are two ways in
which madhura-rasa manifests: mädhurya, transcendental conjugal sweetness; and
audärya, transcendental magnanimity. When mädhurya is pre-eminent, Çré Kåñëa is
manifest, and when audärya is prominent, Çré Gauräìga is manifest. In the
original Våndävana, Goloka, there are two symmetrical halves: kåñëa-péöha, the
abode of Çré Kåñëa; and gaura-péöha, the abode of Çré Gauräìga. In kåñëa-péöha
reside those jévas whose devotional mood is primarily mädhurya, appended with
audärya—they are the devotees of Çré Kåñëa. In gaura-péöha reside those jévas
whose devotional mood is most pronouncedly audärya, supported by mädhurya—they
are the eternal servitors of Çré Gauräìga. In certain cases, some eternally
liberated souls are present simultaneously in both the péöhas through their
svarüpa-vyüha, personal expansions. In other instances, particular pärñadäs
participate in one péöha in their spiritual form, being absent in the other.

“Devotees who worship Çré Gauräìga exclusively in their period of sädhana attain
gaura-péöha when they are liberated and perfect; whereas, those who worship Çré
Kåñëa exclusively in their period of sädhana serve in kåñëa-péöha after
liberation. Then there are those devotees who in their period of sädhana worship
both Çré Kåñëa and Çré Gauräìga. After obtaining liberation, they acquire two
transcendental forms and serve Çré Kåñëa in kåñëa-péöha and Çré Gauräìga in
gaura-péöha simultaneously. This is the divine and confidential mystery of the
inconceivable, simultaneous oneness and difference of Çré Kåñëa and Çré
Gauräìga.”

The unequivocal instructions of Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé about the liberated souls
caused Vrajanätha to be overwhelmed with strong spiritual emotions and he fell
at the feet of his elder Vaiñëava guru. Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, moved to tears,
took Vrajanätha in his arms and, exuding paternal affection, firmly embraced
him. 

Time had flown by and it was late in the night when Vrajanätha took leave of
Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé and slowly returned home, totally engrossed in Bäbäjé’s
instructions in the matter of the jéva’s final destination. While taking his
supper, he spoke sternly with his grandmother, “Grandmother, if you desire to
see me at all, you must cancel those things you call matrimonial arrangements.
Vänimädhava should be told not to visit this house. You must not involve him in
any of our family matters—he is my enemy. I will not speak to him any more and
you should not have anything to do with him.”

A very intelligent lady, the elderly grandmother calmly considered her
conversation earlier that morning with Vänimädhava and the one now with her
grandson Vrajanätha and quickly decided to postpone the entire matter of
Vrajanätha’s matrimony to a future, more congenial time. “Further pressure and
coaxing will aggravate the displeasure of Vrajanätha, perhaps provoking him to
leave home for Väräëasé, Käçi, or Våndävana. Therefore, I shall leave it up to
Çré Parameçvara to do as He pleases,” she concluded within her mind.

Thus ends the seventeenth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma:
Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana. Part Five: The Liberation of the Jéva from
the Prison House of Mäyä

JDH 18: Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Chapter Eighteen
Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Part Six: An Analysis of Simultaneous Oneness and Difference

Vänimädhava was a vicious and harmful person. Wanting to retaliate against
Vrajanätha for castigating him, he had decided to spite Vrajanätha and all the
Bäbäjés. He recruited other criminal men of his own ilk and planned to beat
Vrajanätha severely when he would approach the lonely little hillock of
Lakñmaëa-öilä whilst returning from Çréväsäìgana at night. Somehow this secret
plan leaked out, sketchy news of it reaching the ears of Vrajanätha. He spoke to
Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé and together they concluded that Vrajanätha should reduce
the frequent visits, limiting them to urgent, daytime calls with a strong
escort. 

Vrajanätha was a landlord and had several tenants on his property—among them was
one Haréça Dome, a very expert stick-fighter. Calling him, Vrajanätha said, “I
anticipate some danger to myself. If you could assist me in this matter, I would
feel more secure.”

Haréça replied deferentially, “Why, sir, I am ready to lay down my life for you.
Just point out your enemy and I will finish him off.”

Vrajanätha, “Vänimädhava wants to harm me. I have good reason to believe that he
is planning to ambush me when I return from Çréväsäìgana, where I go to
associate with the Vaiñëavas. Therefore, I am now afraid of going there.” 

Disturbed to hear this, Haréça declared, “Master, care not as long as you have
Haréça beside you. I think that my thick bamboo rod will come to good use upon
the skull of Vänimädhava. In any case, whenever you want to go to Çréväsäìgana
take me along also, so I can see whosoever wants to harm you—I can take on a
hundred of them, alone!”

Vrajanätha resumed his visits to Çréväsäìgana every alternate day or so, with
Haréça escorting him. However, his visits had to be short and so some of the
deep philosophical truths could not be discussed in real detail, which naturally
left him feeling somewhat dissatisfied. This continued for a few weeks until
unexpectedly the news came that the vicious Vänimädhava had died of snakebite. 

Vrajanätha wondered, “Is the premature and painful death of Vänimädhava as a
result of his offences against the Vaiñëavas? Or was the cause something
plainer, for instance, that his time upon earth was exhausted and therefore he
had to leave, as stated in the Çrémad Bhägavatam, 10.1.38:

adya väbda-çatänte vä
måtyur vai präëinäà dhruvaù 

“‘Whether occurring at this moment, or a hundred years later, death is
inevitable for the living entities.’

“Now that all obstacles are removed, I can go to Çréväsäìgana every evening just
as before,” thought Vrajanätha. And that same evening he went to see Raghunätha
däsa Bäbäjé, paid his prostrate obeisances, and said, “I will again start coming
regularly to offer my respects to your hallowed feet. The hindrance Vänimädhava
has left this world forever.”

At first, the compassionate Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé was saddened when he heard
that a human being whose consciousness was slumbering in ignorance had died
before awakening to self-realization. He kept silent for a while and then said,
quoting the Çré Caitanya Caritämåta, Antya-lélä 2.163: 

…sva-karma-phala-bhuk pumän… 

“‘A person is sure to achieve the results of his fruitive activities.’

“Certainly the jéva is the property of Çré Kåñëa and must go wherever he is
sent. My boy, are there any other problems nettling you?”

Vrajanätha, “My only worry has been that for the past several days I was
deprived of relishing your nectarean instruction. This made me very anxious and
so now I am eagerly waiting to hear the rest of the Daça-müla-çikñä.” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “I am always ready to help you. You can, of course, also
ask questions about the topics we have already covered.” 

Vrajanätha, “Under what name are Çré Caitanya’s teachings known? There are
already famous teachings, for example: advaita, monism; dvaita, dualism;
çuddhädvaita, purified monism; viçiñöädvaita, specific monism; and dvaitädvaita,
monism and dualism combined, which are philosophies propagated by the previous
äcäryas. Did Çré Gauräìga endorse any of these philosophies, or did He teach
something entirely new? You have mentioned earlier that Çré Caitanya is in the
Brahma-sampradäya, the disciplic line of Lord Brahmä. Does this mean that Çré
Caitanya is an äcärya in the line of Çré Madhväcärya’s dvaita philosophy, or are
His teachings of a different line?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Listen to the eighth verse of the Daça-müla-çikñä:

hareù çakteù sarvaà cid-acid-akhilaà syät pariëatir
vivartaà no satyaà çruti-mata-viruddhaà kali-malam 
harer bhedäbhedau çruti-vihita-tattvaà suvimalaà
tataù premëaù siddhir bhavati nitya-viñaye

“‘In their entirety, the material and spiritual worlds are the transformations
of the energies of Çré Kåñëa. Vivarta-väda, the impersonal theory of illusory
transformation of Brahman, is false. It is a noxious pollution of Kali-yuga and
contradictory to the conclusions of the Vedas. The philosophy of
acintya-bhedäbheda tattva, inconceivable, simultaneous oneness and difference,
is the true pure essence of the Vedic Truth. The practice of this philosophy
elevates a person to the perfection of developing divine transcendental love for
the Eternal Absolute Truth, Çré Kåñëa.’

“The teachings of the Upaniñads are known as Vedänta. Çréla Vedavyäsa, desiring
to properly articulate these meanings of the Upaniñads, summarised them
systematically according to topics, resulting in a treatise with four chapters
called the Brahma-sütra, also famous as the Vedänta-sütra. This compendium of
the crystallized teachings of the Vedas has always evoked spontaneous
appreciation in the scholarly circles. All the äcäryas from the different
philosophical schools have borrowed ideas from the Vedänta-sütra to authenticate
their individual views. 

“Çré Çaìkaräcärya has attempted to establish vivarta-väda, the Theory of
Illusory Transformation of Brahman, from these sütras. He taught that if
parinäma-väda, the Transformation of Brahman, were applied to Brahman, as an
explanation for the creation, then Brahman would lose its own supreme
unchangeable identity. Çré Çaìkaräcärya, therefore, proposed that vivarta-väda,
the Theory of Illusory Transformation of Brahman, was the superior philosophical
conclusion. This theory of vivarta-väda is also known as mäyäväda, the Theory of
the Illusory Nature of Creation. Attempting to establish his philosophical
proposal, Çré Çaìkaräcärya took verses from the Vedas out of context and at his
convenience to support his views. Through his doctrine, Çré Çaìkaräcärya
attempted to defeat the theory of parinäma-väda, the Transformation of Brahman,
which evidently existed prior to his appearance. 

“Vivarta-väda is only one of many theories proposing to define reality and
dissatisfied with this new ideology of mäyäväda, Çré Madhväcärya formulated
dvaita-väda, the philosophy of duality. He also scrutinized the Vedas,
collecting verses in support of dvaita-väda. After him came Çré Rämänujäcärya,
who also by using the Vedas and Vedänta-sütra, presented the philosophy of
viçiñöädvaita-väda, qualified non-dualism. Next in line was Çré Nimbärkäcärya,
who dived deeply into the same scriptures to crystallize the philosophy of
dvaitädvaita-väda, simultaneous duality and non-duality. Finally, Çré Viñëusvämé
based his philosophy of çuddhädvaita-väda, pure dualism, also on the tenets of
the Vedänta-sutra.

“The mäyäväda doctrine preached by Çré Çaìkaräcärya is contrary to the basic
tenets of bhakti. In contrast, the four Vaiñëava äcäryas, stalwarts in their
particular disciplic successions, presented all their various philosophies
anchored in the truth of devotional surrender to Bhagavän. Later, Çré Caitanya,
holding the complete teachings of the Vedas in the highest esteem, synthesized
the essence of the entire Vedas in His instructions. The philosophy of Çré
Caitanya is renowned as acintya-bhedäbheda-tattva, inconceivable, simultaneous
oneness and difference. Çré Caitanya is in the disciplic line of Çré
Madhväcärya, but only the condensed essence of the views of Çré Madhväcärya has
been collected by Çré Caitanya.”

Vrajanätha, “What is the meaning of parinäma-väda?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Parinäma-väda may be divided into two concepts:
brahma-parinäma-väda, the transformation of Brahman; and
tat-çakti-parinäma-väda, the transformation of the energies of Brahman.

“According to the adherents of brahma-pariëäma-väda, the inconceivable,
impersonal Brahman transforms itself, on the one hand, into the living entities
and, on the other, into the material universe. They site the Chändogya Upaniñad,
6.2.1, which declares: 

…ekam evädvitéyam... 

“‘That, Brahman, is one and unsurpassable.’ 

“From this Vedic statement, they conclude that Brahman is the only known entity.
Hence, this theory may be called advaita-väda, monistic impersonalism. In this
context, vivarta and parinäma are synonyms indicating illusory—or
otherwise—transformation of the impersonal Brahman.

“The second group, tat-çakti-parinäma-väda, states that tat, Brahman, does not
accept transformation, but that the acintya-çakti of Brahman is transformed
partly into the jéva-çakti, which manifests the jévas, and partly into the
mäyä-çakti, which manifests the material universe. If this view is acknowledged,
then Brahman Himself does not become transformed. Thus, Sadänanda writes in his
commentary, Vedänta-sära, 59:

...satattvato’nyathä buddhir vikära ity udérataù...

“‘If the source is the Absolute, then anything generated out of the Absolute is
also an entity partaking of the absolute nature; but the intelligence identifies
the generated entity as distinct from its origin. This is known as vikära,
transformation.’

“What is vikära? It is a separate, distinct identity manifesting from the
Absolute, the Source. Yoghurt, produced from milk, retains some similarity with
milk. However, the intelligence designates yoghurt with a separate identity from
milk—this is vikära. Therefore, the view of brahma-parinäma-väda that this
material universe and the jévas are transformations of Brahman and yet still
non-different from Brahman—without separate identities from Brahman—is very
distorted and lacking in intelligence. Furthermore, if according to the
adherents to this school of thought, the impersonal Brahman is the One Singular
Entity without qualities and distinction, whereby is the possibility of
transformation of such a quality-less entity—illusory or otherwise? Further, if
it is accepted that such a quality-less Brahman is transformable, then Brahman
is robbed of the absolute and detached status. Hence, the theory of
brahma-parinäma-väda is very inaccurate.

“However, the çakti-parinäma-väda theory does not suffer from these logical
deficiencies. Here, Brahman is certainly detached, independent and immutable.
However, in this understanding, the unlimitedly powerful acintya-çakti of
Brahman—capable of making the impossible possible—transforms partly into the
jéva-çakti and partly into the illusory mäyä-çakti. When Brahman desired the
jévas to be manifest, immediately His transcendental jéva-çakti went into action
and produced the innumerable jévas. When Brahman wanted the material world to
come into existence, immediately His mäyä-çakti, the shadow form of His
para-çakti, went into action constructing the material cosmos. However, in all
these activities, Brahman in Himself eternally remains unaffected and without
transformation.

“For the sake of argument one may say that for Brahman to desire is in itself a
transformation of Brahman, therefore how may such a transformation exist in an
immutable Brahman? This mistaken argument is based upon the observation of the
action of desire within the jéva, which should not be applied to Brahman. The
desire of the jéva brings the jéva into contact with a further energy of
Brahman, which in turn then affects the infinitesimal jéva and thus his desire.
Hence, the desire of the jéva is vikära, mutable, by the effect of contact with
the powerful energies of Brahman. This is not the case with Brahman, whose
incorruptible and supremely independent desire springs unrestrainedly from His
intrinsic nature. Although His desire is non-different from His çakti, it is
simultaneously also distinct from His çakti. Therefore, in conclusion, the
absolutely independent desire and will of Brahman is His inherent, inseparable
nature, and externally imposed mutability and transformation are alien to His
constitution.

“The conclusion is that the acintya-çakti of Brahman in obedience to His orders
becomes active and is transformed. The limited intelligence of the jéva cannot
discover unaided this subtle and esoteric truth, which can be realized only
through hearing the testimony of the Vedas. 

“The nature of the transformation of Brahman’s çakti should now be considered.
The example of milk turning into yoghurt is not the only example of the
capability of çakti to transform. In addition, mundane analogies are inadequate
to properly and accurately describe transcendental theories, though specific
aspects of mundane examples are useful in revealing the transcendental truth. 

“The Caitanya Caritämåta, Ädi 7.123-127, describes that a touchstone gem, known
as the cintämaëi, transforms metals and stones into gold and gems respectively,
without itself being transformed in any way. This example can be applied to the
Supreme Lord and the process of creation of the material universe. The Supreme
Lord creates the unlimited material cosmos, complete with the fourteen planetary
systems and the innumerable jévas within, simply by His desire, which activates
His acintya-çakti. Yet, He Himself remains vikära-çünya, unaffected,
untransformed and complete regardless of all these activities. Therefore, the
term vikära-çünya need not be limited only to a postulated impersonal Brahman.
Rather, the term may be correctly applied the Unlimited Absolute Person,
Brahman, who has supreme lordship and a purely spiritual form eternally and
unlimitedly imbued with the six transcendental opulences. The word ‘Brahman’
means båhat, the greatest. Therefore, the word ‘Brahman’ directly refers to the
eternal Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Bhagavän. To define the Supreme
Brahman as only impersonal and thus deprive Him of His acintya-çakti is clearly
contradictory.

“Actually, on account of His acintya-çakti, the Supreme Lord is simultaneously
and eternally both personal and impersonal. If only His impersonal aspect is
acknowledged, His supreme status and absolute completeness is diminished. The
Vedas have described the Supreme Absolute Truth as the prime doer, His actions
having three aspects: apadäna, the source and supplier, that is the ablative
case—from whom; käraëa, the cause and instrument, that is the instrumental
case—by whom; and adhikaraëa, the mainstay and support, that is the locative
case—in whom.

“In the Taittiréya Upaniñad, 3.1.1, Åñi Bhågu says in the first chapter:

yato vä imäni bhütäni jäyante; 
yena jätäni jévanti; 
yat prayanty abhisaàviçanti; 
tad vijijïäsasva; tad brahmeti 

“‘Bhågu, the son of Varuëa, approached his father and said, “Lord, kindly
instruct me in Brahman.” Varuëa replied, “The one who is the source of all the
jévas, the one who maintains them, and the one into whom all the jévas enter at
the time of total annihilation, is the subject of your question. He is Brahman.’

“The purport of this verse is that the words ‘the source of all living entities’
describe the Lord as apadäna. As ‘the maintainer and sustainer’ He is käraëa,
and as ‘the One into whom all jévas enter’ He is adhikaraëa. The Supreme
Absolute Truth has been specified by these three symptoms of personality, hence
He is always Çré Bhagavän. While analysing the characteristic traits of the
Supreme Being, Çréla Jéva Gosvämé writes in his treatise the Bhägavata
Sandarbha:

ekam eva tat parama-tattvaà sväbhävikäcintya-çaktyä 
sarvadaiva svarüpa-tad-rüpa-vaibhava-jéva-pradhäna-rüpeëa 
caturdhävatiñöhate süryäntarmaëòalastha-teja iva 
maëòala tad-bahir-gataraçmi-tat-prattichavi-rüpeëa.
durghaöa-ghaöa-katvaà hyacintyatvam

“‘The parama-tattva, the Supreme Absolute Truth, is one. He controls
inconceivable potencies intrinsic to His nature. These potencies manifest His
svarüpa, personal form; His tadrüpa vaibhäva, immediate opulent expansions; the
jévas, the living entities; and the pradhäna, the sum total of material
ingredients. An appropriate parallel to explain these four aspects of the
Absolute Truth is their correspondence with following four: the inner core of
the sun planet, the surface of the sun planet itself, the rays emanating from
the sun planet, and the light of the sun planet reflected from another surface
far away.’ 

“His svarüpa is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. His transcendental name,
abode, associates and paraphernalia are tadrüpa-vaibhäva. The jévas, both the
unlimited conditioned souls and the eternally liberated souls, are His
infinitesimal spiritual sparks. His illusory energy, mäyä, and the gross and
subtle material elements created by mäyä are known as the pradhäna. These four
manifestations are eternal and so is the oneness of the Supreme Absolute Truth.
A pertinent question at this juncture would be, ‘How can the two apparently
conflicting eternal paradigms of personality and impersonality simultaneously
coexist?’ The reply, ‘It is impossible for the human intellect to accept this
proposition, because the intellect is limited, but within the paradigm of the
acintya-çakti of the Supreme Lord such apparent contradictions are easily
harmonised.’”

Vrajanätha, “Kindly define vivarta-väda.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “In the Vedas, there is a description of vivarta,
bewilderment, however that description is not at all similar to that proposition
of the monistic impersonalists, which has become known as vivarta-väda. Çré
Çaìkaräcärya’s distorted interpretation of the word vivarta unceremoniously
herds the reader into the mäyäväda enclosure, where vivarta-väda and mäyäväda
become synonymous. The actual scientific and etymological explanation of the
word vivarta is found in the commentary of the sage Sadänanda, known as the
Vedänta-sära, wherein verse 49 we find: 

atattvato ’nyathä-buddhir vivarta ity udähåtaù 

“‘To mistakenly perceive any object—which is contrary to and different from the
actual real object—to be the real object, is called vivarta.’

“The jéva, a minute spiritual particle of the Supreme Absolute Being, is
imprisoned in the tabernacle of his physical body and because of ignorance about
his real identity falsely identifies himself with his gross and subtle bodies.
He considers them his real self. This misunderstanding and false conclusion is
called vivarta. This explanation is in line with the Vedic understanding. 

“For example, a person may think, ‘I am Raghunätha Bhaööäcärya, the son of
Sanätana Bhaööäcärya, who has many titles and possessions.’ Another may think,
‘I am Sädhu Caëòäla, the son of Vijaya Caëòäla.’ However, both are seriously
mistaken. They are actually individual jévas, tiny particles of spirit, but
because they identify with their temporary material bodies, they are deluded and
deceived. Similarly, a rope may be mistaken for a snake and a glistening
oyster-shell may be mistaken for silver. However, both vivartas are caused by
optical illusions. Therefore, the Vedas, by referring to many mundane analogies
such as the above, abound with instructions to expel the illusion of the soul’s
false material identity, which is vivarta, a false perception, mistaking one
thing for another.

“However, the mäyävädé philosophers have ignored the Vedic definition of vivarta
and have misconstrued the actual Vedic meaning to their own peculiar notion.
They say the truth is, ‘I am Brahman,’ and its perverted perception is, ‘I am
the jéva.’ This bewildered misidentification, they postulate, is called vivarta.
This false definition of the actual Vedic understanding creates a smoke screen
around the Truth. The correct understanding of vivarta-väda corresponds with the
çakti-pariëäma-väda, the transformation of energy concept, whereas the mäyävädé
presentation of vivarta-väda is ludicrous and dispersed into many versions,
three of which are prominent: (1) in a deluded state Brahman thinks He is jéva,
and thus the jévas are created; (2) the jévas are the bewildered reflections of
Brahman; (3) Brahman is only dreaming that He has created the jévas and this
inferior material universe. All such misinterpretations are distortions of the
Vedic version.” 

Vrajanätha, “Master, I am unable to fully grasp this philosophy of mäyäväda?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Calmly consider what I say, the mäyä-çakti is merely
the shadow representation of the absolute cit-çakti of the Lord, and so the
spiritual abodes, where Her entry is not allowed, are outside Her jurisdiction.
The control of Mäyädevé extends only to the extremities of this material
universe. The jéva has entered this prison-like material world under nescience
and delusion. The supreme transcendental entity, Çré Bhagavän, enjoys absolute
freedom and is in full independent command of His multifarious çaktis. These
truths are not completely accepted by the mäyävädé philosophers. 

“The mäyävädés claim that the jéva is actually Brahman, but because of the
bewildering influence of mäyä they have separate identities. And as long as the
jéva keeps contact with mäyä, he remains a jéva, but when he dissociates from
mäyä, he immediately regains his Brahman status and identity. Unfortunately, the
jéva does not exist without mäyä, being the creation of mäyä’s effect upon
Brahman; therefore, the jéva’s only conceivable liberation is to merge into the
existence of Brahman, thus losing his illusory identity. In this way, the
mäyävädés withhold the original, eternal, spiritual and individual identity from
the jéva, putting him into a pigeonhole of illusion with a fictitious role.

“Another concocted claim of the mäyävädés concerns the Supreme Lord. As He is
transcendental to material nature, He must allow Himself to come under the
influence of the mäyä-çakti and accept an illusory material form upon descending
to the material world as an incarnation, otherwise He cannot enter the
phenomenal world. While present upon this earth, the incarnations perform
superhuman tasks and when it is time for them to return to the spiritual
platform they give up their material forms, thus leaving this world. Brahman is
formless, but to become an incarnation Brahman must enter a material form
composed of mäyä.

“However, in spite of these speculations by the mäyävädés, in one aspect they
have at least condescended and magnanimously allowed the Supreme Lord a position
superior to the jéva. The jéva is forced to accept a material body as a result
of karmic reactions even against his will, and as a result of the unfolding
karmic reactions he must accept old age, death and birth. The Supreme Lord, they
say, is not in such a compromised position; voluntarily He accepts an illusory
form, restrictions, a name and qualities, etc. If He wishes to discard all these
material things, at will He instantly regains the platform of pure goodness and
is transformed into the embodiment of unadulterated spiritual consciousness. He
performs activities, but never comes under the constraints of karmic reactions.
These are some of the philosophical aberrations propagated by the various
mäyävädé schools.”

Vrajanätha, “Are any of these mäyävädé teachings found in the Vedas?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The answer is emphatically negative. Nowhere do the
Vedas uphold the mäyävädé precepts. In a sense, mäyäväda philosophy is the same
as Buddhism. The Padma Puräëa, Uttara-khaëòa, 43.6, states:

mäyävädam asac chästraà 
pracchannaà bauddham ucyate
mayaiva kalpitaà devi 
kalau brähmaëa-rüpiëä 

“‘Replying to the question of Umä Devé, Lord Çiva said, “O Devé, mäyävädé
philosophy is extremely materialistic and warped. The nihilistic views of
Buddhism have surreptitiously been disguised in the Vedic jargon and have
entered the arena of civilized Aryan dharma. This is the mäyävädé philosophy,
which I must propagate in Kali-yuga, having taken birth in a brähmaëa family.’”

Vrajanätha, “Master! Lord Çiva, the chief of the devas, is a stalwart Vaiñëava
devotee, why did he undertake such a terrible mission?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Lord Çiva is the guëa-avatära, qualitative incarnation,
of Çré Bhagavän. In order to fulfil their sinister motives, the asuras, demoniac
forces, had decided to take up the path of bhakti and self-interestedly worship
the Supreme Lord to gain great fruitive results and conquer over the devoted
devatas. The compassionate Lord, who always protects His surrendered devotees,
became concerned with this new trend in the asuras and set about to defend the
purity of the institution of bhakti. He called for Lord Çiva and said, ‘Dear
Çambhu, it will not be beneficial if the precepts of çuddha-bhakti are preached
to the envious rascal asuras, who are steeped determinably in tamasic nescience.
In order to delude these asuras, you must create a distorted commentary on the
Vedas and present impersonalist mäyävädé teachings. In this way, I will be
concealed from the asuras, who will be inveigled away from the path of bhakti
and made to follow impersonalism, thus leaving My favoured devotees undisturbed
in their relishment of çuddha-bhakti.’

“Lord Çiva, a very dedicated Vaiñëava devotee, at first expressed his sadness
about being burdened with such an onerous responsibility, but, surrendered
servant as he is, he unquestioningly took up the mission and executed the orders
of His Lord. How could Lord Çiva be blamed for this? He did not commit any
mistake by following the instructions of His Supreme Lord, for the entire
creation is subject to the management of Çré Bhagavän. The Lord wields His
Sudarçana-cakra for the protection of all His created jévas. He alone knows the
ultimate benefit for the jévas hidden within His instructions. The only duty of
His surrendered devotees is to simply carry out His orders. For this reason, the
pure Vaiñëava saints never condemn Çré Çaìkaräcärya, the incarnation of Lord
Çiva who preached the mäyäväda philosophy.

“Take note of the following evidences from the scriptures, Padma Puräëa,
Uttara-khaëòa, 42. 109-110:

‘tvam ärädhya yathä çambho 
geahiñyämi varaà sadä
dväparädau yuge bhütvä
kalayä mänuñädiñu

svägamaiù kalpitais tvaà tu
janän madvimukhän kuru
maà ca gopaya yena syät
såñöir eñottarottarä 

“‘Çré Viñëu said, “O Çambhu, although I am the Supreme Lord, I have worshiped
the different devas and devés simply to mislead the asuras. In the same manner,
I shall worship you to obtain boons from you. You should descend to earth in
your partial expansion and take birth as a human being in Kali-yuga. Concoct a
school of thought by misconstruing the Vedas and divert the mind of the people
away from Me. Make sure that these fictitious literatures veil My true spiritual
and supreme identity, and—enticing the atheistic gross materialists—rapidly
spread atheism amongst them.’

“Further, in the Varäha Puräëa:

eña mohaà såjämyäsu
yo janän mohayiñyati
tväà ca rudra mahäbäho
moha çäñträné käraya

atatkyäni vitakhyäni
darçayasva mahäbhuja 
prakäçaà kuru cätmanam
aprakäçaà ca mäm kuru 

“‘O Çiva! I am about to create such an illusion that the entire humanity will
become confounded. Prepare the fabrication of fictitious literature that will
present the truth as unreal and the unreal as truth. Manifest your terrible
image of the Destroyer and conceal My eternal transcendental form from the
vision of the people.’”

Vrajanätha, “Are there scriptural evidences repudiating the mäyäväda school of
thought?” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The entire Vedic scriptures present strong proofs
denouncing mäyäväda philosophy. After scouring the Vedas, the torchbearers of
the mäyäväda school have come up with just four seemingly substantive
statements, which they have inventively labelled as mahä-väkya, great dictums:

“Firstly, in the Chändogya Upaniñad, 3.14.1:

sarvaà khalv idaà brahma

“‘The phenomenal world is an external manifestation of Brahman and is
non-different from Him.’

“And also in the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad, 4.4.19, and the Kaöha Upaniñad,
2.1.11:

neha nänästi kiïcana

“‘Brahman is free from any material distinctions.’

“Secondly, in the Aitareya Upaniñad, 1.5.3:

prajïänaà brahmä 

“‘Prajïä, pure knowledge, is transcendental and is of the same spiritual
substance as Brahman.’

“Thirdly, in the Chändogya Upaniñad, 6.8.7:

tat tvam asi çvetaketo 

“‘O Çvetaketo, you are that, Brahman.’

“Fourthly, in the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad, 1.4.10:

ahaà brahmäsmi 

“‘I, the jéva soul, am of the same nature as Brahman.’

“According to the first mahä-väkya, this material world and the jévas are all
Brahman—nothing exists outside Brahman. The nature of Brahman has been described
in the Svetäçvatara Upaniñad, 6.8, as follows:

na tasya käryaà karaëaà ca vidyate
na tat-samaç cäbhyadhikaç ca dåçyate
paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate
sväbhäviké jïäna-bala-kriyä ca

“‘The Supreme Lord never requires the assistance of material senses to
accomplish His works because He neither possesses a material body, nor material
senses. His body is completely spiritual. Therefore, His physical presence is
not limited like a material body—He is simultaneously present everywhere with
His beautiful spiritual form. He is in Våndävana, His beauty blossoming in fresh
youthfulness, dallying in eternal pastimes, and, at the same moment, He is fully
present throughout His creation. Nothing or no one is equal to or greater than
He is, because He is full of acintya-çakti. His potency is defined as acintya
because the human intellect is unable to fathom Her position. Parä-çakti, His
supreme absolute potency, is another designation for His acintya-çakti. Although
this acintya-çakti is one, She is nevertheless manifest in manifold
magnificence, known as jïäna, cognition; bala, power; and kriyä, activity.’

“Brahman and His energies are one, as substantiated in this verse. Here çakti is
described as sväbhäviké, an effortless and inherent part of the Supreme Lord,
though it is also vividha, variegated. Since, çaktimän, the possessor of
potency, i.e. Brahman, and çakti, the potency of Brahman, are defined as
non-different, this certainly implies that everything is one with Brahman.
However, when we exclusively examine the material world, Brahman and His çakti
apparently have two separate identities, and thus variety becomes prominent.
Therefore, the Kaöhopaniñad, 2.13, and Svetäçvatara Upaniñad, 6.10, comment:

nityo nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm
eko bahünäà yo vidadhäti kämän

“‘The Supreme Lord is eternal and the other living beings are eternal. The
Supreme Lord is cognizant and the other living beings are cognizant. The
difference is that the Supreme Lord is supplying all the necessities of life for
the many other living entities.’

“This verse of the çruti, the Vedas, confirms the eternal diversity of Brahman
and His numerous eternal expansions. 

“Now let us examine the second so-called mahä-väkya statement of the çruti,
Aitareya Upaniñad, 1.5.3: 

…prajïänaà brahman… 

“‘Prajïä, pure knowledge, is transcendental and is of the same spiritual
substance as Brahman.’

“This verse equates the prajïänaà with Brahman, however the çruti,
Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad, 4.4.21, clarifies by defining prajïänaà as
prema-bhakti, as noted in this verse: 

tam eva dhéro vijïäya prajïäà kurvéta brähmaëaù 

“‘An intelligent equipoised person who has realized Brahman must endeavour to
know the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, and surrender unto
Him with loving devotion.’

“Now the third mahä-väkya of the Chändogya Upaniñad, 6.8.7: 

...tat tvam asi çvetaketo…

“‘O Çvetaketo, you are that.’

“This statement teaches that Brahman is equal with çakti. The Båhad-äraëyaka
Upaniñad, 3.8.10, elaborates upon this subject:

yo vä etad akñaraà gärgy aviditväsmäl lokät praiti sa kåpaëaù
ya etad akñaraà gärgi viditväsmäl lokät praiti sa brähmaëaù

“‘The twice-born brähmaëa who after receiving the sacred thread does not immerse
himself into the study of the Vedas, but busies himself with less important
texts and subject matters, will very soon in this life-time along with his
family acquire the lowly qualities of a çüdra.’

“A person who realizes the actual truth of tat tvam asi ultimately attains
devotional service to the Supreme Lord and becomes a true practising brähmaëa. 

“Now the fourth mahä väkya of the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad, 1.4.10: 

…aham brahmäsmi…

“‘I, the jéva soul, am of the same nature as Brahman.’ 

“The knowledge displayed in this text if misused and not dovetailed to seek out
the Supreme Lord and surrender unto Him is severely castigated in the
Éçopaniñad, verse 12:

andhaà tamaù praviçanti
ye ’sambhütim upäsate
tato bhüya iva te tamo
ya u sambhütyäà ratäù 

“‘Those who are engaged in the culture of nescient activities shall enter into
the darkest region of ignorance. Worst still are those, who are engaged in the
so-called culture of knowledge, mäyäväda.’

“The purport is that a person who is ignorant of his spiritual identity as a
result of engrossment in nescient material activities and sensual pursuits is
cast into the darkness of ignorance. However, others, even after having
dissipated such nescience, who do not realize that the soul is the servitor part
and parcel of the Supreme Transcendence and thus foolishly consider themselves
as Brahman, the Supreme, are hurled down to an even worse and darker hell.

“The Vedas are immensely voluminous. Their exact essence can only be extracted
by scrutinizing every single çloka from each of the Upaniñads, Puräëas, and so
on. Isolated and out-of-context statements cannot present a clear picture, but
rather distort the real meaning. Ultimately, therefore, Çré Caitanya
tooth-combed the entire Vedic literature and formulated His most sublime
transcendental teachings, presenting the most elevated philosophy of
acintya-bhedäbheda, that the jéva and matter are simultaneously one with and
distinct from the Supreme Lord, Çré Hari.”

Vrajanätha, “Master, kindly substantiate how this philosophy of
acintya-bhedäbheda is properly rooted in the Vedas.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “First of all, here is a collection of çlokas from the
Vedas describing the abheda, inherent similarity, between the Supreme Lord and
His çakti, in the Chändogya Upaniñad, 3.14.1:

sarvaà khalv idaà brahma

“‘Everything, both matter and spirit, is non-different from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead who is the Supreme Brahman.’ 

“Further, the Chändogya Upaniñad, 7.25.2:

ätmaivedaà sarvam iti 

“‘This entire cosmic phenomenon is ätmä, the Supreme Soul.’

“Further, the Chändogya Upaniñad, 6.2.1:

sad eva saumyedam agra äséd ekam evädvitéyam 

“‘Uddalaka said to his son Çvetaketu, “Before this phenomenal universe came into
existence, only the one non-dual Eternal Being was present.’

“Further, the Svetäçvatara Upaniñad, 5.4:

evaà sa devo bhagavän vareëyo yoni-svabhävän adhitiñöhaty ekaù

“‘The sun dispels darkness and lightens up all the far directions whilst
situated in one place. Similarly, the Supreme Lord, although He is the cause of
all causes, remains unaffected and untransformed, therefore He is the object of
all worship and devotion.’

“Next is a compilation of çlokas from the scriptures delineating the
characteristic distinction between Éçvara and His çakti:

“In the Taittiréya Upaniñad, 2.1:

auà brahma-vid äpnoti param

“‘He who is learned in the knowledge of Brahman attains the Supreme Brahman, the
Personality of Godhead.’

“In the Kathä Upaniñad, 1.222:

mahäntaà vibhum ätmänaà matvä dhéro na çocati 

“‘The learned paëòitas—knowing that the ätmä resides in different living
entities and is not limited by time and space, but is great and
all-pervasive—are not overcome by lamentation.’

“In the Taittiréya Upaniñad, 2.1.2:

satyaà jïänam anantaà brahma 
yo veda nihitaà guhäyäà parame vyoman 
so ’çnute sarvän kämän saha brahmaëä vipaçciteti

“‘The Supreme Absolute Brahman is the embodiment of eternity and spirituality
and He is transcendental to the purview of material time, place and senses. One,
who has realized the truth that the Supreme Brahman is simultaneously situated
in the spiritual sky and in the heart of the jéva, is sublimely connected with
the Supersoul in a loving relationship, which fulfils all the spiritual desires
of the jéva.’

“In the Svetäçvatara Upaniñad, 3.9:

yasmät paraà näparam asti kiïcid
yasmän nänéyo na jyäyo sti kiïcit
våkña iva stabdho divi tiñöhaty ekas
tenedaà pürëaà puruñeëa sarvam 

“‘There is nothing or no one superior to Him. He is smaller than the smallest
and greater than the greatest. He always remains fixed in His status like a
towering tree. He is present in the resplendent abode of transcendence, and
simultaneously He resides in the inner sanctorum of this universe, as the
Paramätmä, by His inconceivable potency.’

“In the Svetäçvatara Upaniñad, 6.16:

pradhäna-kñetrajïa-patir guëeçaù

“‘He is the controller of mäyä, the regent of the universe, the Lord of the
material modes, and is beyond their influence...’

“In the Kathä Upaniñad, 2.23:

tasyaiña ätmä vivåëute tanuà sväm 

“‘The Supreme Lord is attained only by one whom He Himself chooses. To such a
person He manifests His own form.’

“In the Svetäçvatara Upaniñad, 3.19:

tam ähur ägryaà puruñaà mahantam 

“‘Learned transcendentalists explain that the Supreme Lord is the greatest, the
Original Person.’

“In the Éçopaniñad, verse 8:

yäthätathyato ’rthän vyadadhäc chäçvatébhyaù samäbhyaù

“‘He (who) has fulfilled the desires of everybody since time immemorial by dint
of His acintya-çakti.’

“In the Kena Upaniñad, 3.6:

naitad açakaà vijïätuà yad etad yakñam iti 

“‘Agni Deva said, “I could not realize just who this great personality is.’

“In the Taittiréya Upaniñad, 2.7:

asad vä idam agra' asset
 tato vai sadä 'jäyata
 tad ätmänaà svayam 'akuruta
tasmät tat sukåtam ucya'ta iti

“‘Before this universe came into existence, only Brahman was present in His
unmanifest form. The universe was created and became manifest from the
unmanifest Brahman—by transformation of the external energy of Brahman. This
Supreme Brahman exhibits Himself as the Supreme Person and His personal form is
known as sukåti.’

“In the Kathä Upaniñad, 2.13, and Svetäçvatara Upaniñad, 6.13:

…nityo nityänäm… 

“‘He, the Supreme Brahman, is the fundamental eternal being amongst all eternal
beings.’

“In the Muëòaka Upaniñad, mantra 2:

sarvaà hy etad brahmäyam ätmä brahma so’ yam ätmä catuñpät

“‘All this is inferior Brahman substance, emanating from the energy of Brahman.
The Supreme Brahman is none other than Çré Kåñëa, the Personality of Godhead and
the Universal Soul. And although He is one, He expands Himself by His
inconceivable energy as four Personalities, all embodying rasa, divine spiritual
mellow.’

“In the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad, 2.5.14:

ayam ätmä sarveñäà bhütänäm madhu 

“‘The Supersoul is indeed the perennial source of the sublime nectar of
immortality.’

“In this way, the rich, fathomless mine of Vedic literature contains innumerable
quotations supporting the bheda principle, the principle of eternal difference.
Every part of the Vedas is totally perfect—no single portion can be discarded as
non-essential. The eternal ‘oneness’ is as much a timeless and eternal principle
as the inherent ‘duality’. These two eternal principles coexist simultaneously
and are unequivocally upheld in the scriptures—even though this principle of
simultaneous oneness and difference is materially inconceivable and therefore
outside the range of the human mental faculty. Any extended debate about this
subject would certainly fall into a bottomless pit, leading to confusion and
uncertainty. Whatever is stated in the Vedas is the Absolute Truth. As human
intelligence is limited, we should not whimsically reject the conclusions of the
Vedas. Hence, the Vedic scriptures warn us in the Kathä Upaniñad, 1.2.9:

naiña tarkeëa matir apaneyä 

“‘O Naciketa! Now that you have attained the transcendental consciousness of
Self-knowledge do not squander it through dry empirical debates.’

“In the Kena Upaniñad, 2.2:

nähaà manye suvedeti no na vedeti veda ca 

“‘I do not claim to know Brahman fully, nor is it true that I do not know Him at
all. Those of us, who have realized Brahman, know Him in truth.’

“These verses clearly indicate that the energies of the Supreme Lord are
inconceivable and cannot be approached through logic and speculative
theorization. The Mahäbhärata instructs:

puräëaà manavo dharmaù
saìgo vedaç cikitsitam
ajïa-siddhäni catväri
na hantavyäni hetubhiù

“‘The sattvika-vaiñëava-puräëas, the religious laws of Manu, the six schools of
Vedic philosophy, and the entire literature and medical science of the Vedas are
the four perfected subjects directly spoken by the Supreme Lord. In an attempt
to distort their clear and primary purport no one must challenge or debate upon
these topics.’

“Therefore the acintya-bhedäbheda principle is perfect and flawless and
unconditionally supported in the Vedas. As the jéva searches for the prayojana,
the ultimate perfection and prime necessity of human existence, the
acintya-bhedäbheda principle stands firm as the only actual philosophy of the
Absolute Truth in the highest realms of human aspiration. 

“When the jéva has acknowledged and understood this paramount principle he will
doubtlessly realize that dualism presents an eternal aspect in the relationship
between Çré Kåñëa and His çaktis. Without this realization, the jéva cannot
attain the prayojana of human existence, which is kåñëa-prema.”

Vrajanätha, “What is the concrete proof that prema is the prime human
necessity?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Vedas declare in the Muëòaka Upaniñad, 3.1.4:

präëo hy eña sarva-bhütair vibhäti
vijänan vidvän bhavate näti-vädé
ätma-kréòa ätma-ratiù kriyävän
eña brahma-vidäà variñöhaù 

“‘He who is the Supreme amongst all living entities and is present in every
being is realized as the Supreme Personality of Godhead by the learned sages
through the science of loving devotional service. Such sages become liberated in
this life and are fully engaged in glorifying the wonderful qualities of the
Supreme Lord, knowing all other topics to be inferior. These sages pass their
time engrossed in loving devotional exchanges with the Lord and are constantly
relishing the amorous pastimes of the Lord. Such sages are the most exalted
amongst all Brahman-realized souls.’

“In the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad, 2.4.5, the sage Yäjïavalkya instructs his wife,
Maitreyi:

na vä are sarvasya kämäya sarvaà priyaà bhavaty 
ätmanas tu kämäya sarvaà priyaà bhavati 

“‘Yäjïavalkya said, “Maitreyi, no one endeavours to love or be loved for the
sake of another’s happiness, but one tries to love and be loved for fulfilling
one’s own wish for happiness.’

“This verse of the Båhad-äraëyaka Upaniñad explains that to love and be loved is
the prime need and goal of the individual soul. 

“Love for the Supreme Lord is described in many passages of the Vedas and the
Çrémad-Bhägavatam. The Taittiréya Upaniñad, 2.7, plainly states that prema is
the prime human necessity, above all other contingencies: 

raso vai saù
ko hy evänyät kaù präëyät 
yad eña äkäça änando na syät 
eña hy evänandayäti 

“‘Çré Kåñëa is the embodiment of all-ecstatic bliss and the reservoir of all
pleasure. Having derived ecstasy from Him, the individual souls become blissful.
For, who indeed could breathe, who indeed could be alive, if this blissful Lord
were not present within the heart of all souls. It is He alone who bestows
ecstasy.’

“Änanda, divine bliss, is synonymous with prema. Every living entity aspires
after änanda. The mumukñu, seekers after salvation, consider mukti as the
highest änanda and madly pursue such. The bubhukñu, sense-enjoyers, find änanda
in carnal pleasures and single-mindedly perform those bodily activities that
appear to promise this concept of änanda. The devotees cultivate devotional
service to Çré Kåñëa, finding in Him their prime source of änanda. Thus, every
individual searches for änanda even to the extent that he is ready to sacrifice
his own body and life for the same. This search for änanda applies to all
persons whether they be atheists, theistic believers, jïänés, karmis, or even
renunciates. However, there is no guarantee that such a search will lead to
success. The karma-vädés, practitioners of fruitive action, are convinced that
heavenly änanda is the ultimate, until they discover otherwise. After their
sojourn in the material heavenly planets, lasting for as long as the results of
their pious deeds allow, they fall from that paradise, as is confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gétä, 9.21: 

te taà bhuktvä svarga-lokaà viçälaà
kñéëe puëye martya-lokaà viçanti

“‘When they have thus enjoyed vast heavenly sense pleasure and the results of
their pious activities are exhausted, they return to this mortal planet again.’ 

“This verse explains that such fruitive workers must eventually fall down even
from Svargaloka, the material paradise. In this way, their plan to enjoy
unrestrictedly becomes thwarted. A person seeks the heavenly material paradise
when his pursuits, acquisition of wealth, healthy children, fame and power upon
this earthly plane fail to fully provide him with happiness. Thus motivated, he
may achieve such paradise, but at the time of his inevitable demotion, he
realizes that the enjoyments he has experienced in the higher material planetary
systems are transitory and thus have no real value. Gradually, therefore, he
comes to realize that life and happiness are flickering and transitory
throughout the entire material world—whether the place be earth, heaven, or even
Brahmaloka, the highest material planetary system. Next, like a drowning man, he
desperately reaches out for a straw in the form of nirväëa, the impersonal
worship of Brahman, and becomes apathetic towards the world. Then upon attaining
Brahman realization he is again disillusioned, for the happiness he seeks
remains elusive. Realising that it is not available in nirväëa either, he
returns to his marginal state and searches hopefully for an alternative path.
How can the jéva expect prema and änanda in a relationship with the non-dual
impersonal Brahman? Who can experience änanda where individual identity is
absent? In a situation where everything becomes an amorphous oneness, how is
änanda to be found and relished? If the self, the jéva, merges into Brahman, who
remains to feel änanda? With the self totally effaced, who will perceive and
interact with Brahman? Brahman is änanda, but with no one to enjoy
brahman-änanda what proof is there whether änanda exists at all in Brahman?
Thus, having consigned his individual personality to oblivion, a jéva is left
with nothing. Who is there anymore to be concerned with attaining the prime
necessity of life? If the ‘I’ ceases to exist, then everything else pertaining
to ‘I’ also ceases to exist. 

“Someone may argue that the ‘I’ shall remain since ‘I’ am brahma-rüpa, the form
of Brahman. Such logic is not balanced, for if one actually were the Absolute
Brahman one would be so eternally—what then would be the sädhya for one to
attain? What is the necessity of sädhana, if one is already eternally Brahman?
What is the perfection to be attained beginning from a state of perfection?
Where is the sense in such an endeavour? 

“Striving for brahma-nirväëa is not the same as attaining prema—it is merely an
illusory goal. Actually, impersonal liberation ultimately does not exist, it is
present like a flower in the sky—a non-entity—and is a hoax upon the living
entity. The only way that the prayojana can be accomplished is through bhakti.
The pinnacle of bhakti is prema, which is eternal. The jéva is eternal, Kåñëa is
eternal, and the distinction between the jéva and Kåñëa is also eternal.
Therefore, to acknowledge the principle of acintya-bhedäbheda is to accept that
prema is eternal. Otherwise, the prayojana of the jéva will be tainted with
impermanence, thus destroying its very basis. Therefore, the scriptures firmly
support the principle of acintya-bhedäbheda. All other philosophies are either
derivatives of or deviants from this truth.”

That night, as he walked back home, Vrajanätha was completely engrossed in
Bäbäjé’s delineation of prema and felt an ineffable exhilaration flooding his
heart.

Thus ends the eighteenth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma:
Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana, Part Six: An Analysis of Simultaneous
Oneness and Difference

JDH 19: Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Chapter Nineteen
Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Part Seven: An Analysis of Abhidheya, the Means of Attainment of Prema

When Vrajanätha lay down to rest after supper, the different aspects of the
acintya-bhedäbheda principle were running through his mind like waves in an
ocean of thought. However, the rhythmic sequence of this ocean was occasionally
disturbed by whirlpools of doubt. Could it be that the acintya-bhedäbheda
principle was just another misinterpretation, another deviation from the
Absolute Truth? Yet calm, cogent deliberations pacified these disconcerting
thoughts, “Nowhere in the entire scriptures can evidence be found to defeat this
principle. In fact, the scepticism fostered by any discordant doubts is quickly
dissipated by the coherent and convincing statements of the çästra. Besides, Çré
Gauräìga is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, how could there be any
discrepancy in His profound deliberations? I hope that I shall never leave the
shelter of His lotus feet!

“Now all these thoughts are very encouraging, but what have I tangibly
accomplished, besides an awareness of the acintya-bhedäbheda principle as the
highest description of the Absolute Truth? What have I gained from this
knowledge? Revered Bäbäjé Mahäräja has said that prema is the ultimate purpose
of human life. The karmis and jïänés also are seeking after this divine gem
called prema, but without actually knowing what the pure pristine state of prema
actually is. In conclusion, my target must be to attain the pure state of prema.
I have to ask Bäbäjé Mahäräja about this and try to grasp the scriptural
conclusions upon this matter.” 

It was late and gradually overcome by sleep Vrajanätha entered another
dimension. Waking later than usual the next morning, he quickly finished his
morning duties. Presently his maternal uncle, Vijaya-kumära Bhaööäcärya, arrived
to see him. Very pleased to meet his uncle after a long time, Vrajanätha offered
him prostrate obeisances. 

Vijaya-kumära was very well versed in the Çrémad Bhägavatam. With great good
fortune, he had received the direct grace of Çrématé Näräyaëé devé, who had
inspired within him the teachings of Çré Caitanya. He was now extremely
attracted to Çré Caitanya and was at present an itinerant preacher of the Çrémad
Bhägavatam.

Vijaya-kumära’s recent travels had led him to Denuòa-gräma, where he had
received the instruction of Çréla Våndävana däsa Öhäkura to visit the
transcendental site of Çré Caitanya’s appearance, the Yoga-péöha. Çréla
Våndävana däsa Öhäkura had predicted that very soon all the places connected
with the pastimes of Çré Caitanya would be lost and only rediscovered after
almost four centuries. He further explained that the places of Çré Caitanya’s
pastimes are equal to Vraja-dhäma Våndävana in every respect and that those
elevated souls who are fortunate enough to see the transcendental sites at
Mäyäpura and other nearby holy places are indeed eligible to perceive the
spiritual Våndävana.

After having heard these things directly from Çréla Våndävana däsa Öhäkura, the
incarnation of Çréla Vyäsadeva, Vijaya-kumära had grown eager to see
Mäyäpura-dhäma. He had decided to pay a visit to Bilva Puñkariëé, where his
sister and nephew happened to be living, and then visit the nearby
Mäyäpura-dhäma. In those days, Bilva Puñkariëé village was in the close
neighbourhood of Brähmaëa Puñkariëé village, unlike now, when they are miles
apart. The Yoga-péöha, the birth site of Çré Gauräìga in Mäyäpura, had
previously been no more than a mile away from the original Bilva Puñkariëé
village, which was now a sleepy and neglected site called Öoöä and Täraëaväsa.

Vijaya-kumära quickly embraced his nephew and said, “Son, I am on my way to
visit Çré Mäyäpura-dhäma. Inform your mother that on my way back I will take
lunch here.” Vrajanätha, growing curious, asked, “Uncle, why do you want to
visit Mäyäpura-dhäma?” 

Vijaya-kumära was unaware of the recent developments in Vrajanätha’s spiritual
life. All he knew was that Vrajanätha had given up his studies of nyäya and had
seriously taken up Vedänta. Therefore, he felt he had better not reveal his
intimate spiritual affairs to Vrajanätha and replied only, “I have an
appointment with someone in Mäyäpura.”

Vrajanätha knew that his uncle was a devotee of Çré Gauräìga and an exponent of
the Çrémad Bhägavatam. Therefore, surmising that his uncle was going to meet
someone on spiritual matters, Vrajanätha said, “Uncle, since you are going to
Mäyäpura, please find the time to meet Çréla Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé Mahäräja, an
elevated and respected Vaiñëava.”

Mildly surprised, Vijaya-kumära asked, “Son, I see you have developed some faith
and respect for the Vaiñëavas. I heard that you had given up research in nyäya
and turned to Vedänta. Since you have obviously entered upon the path of bhakti,
I need no longer keep my culture of spirituality secret from you. Çréla
Våndävana däsa Öhäkura has instructed me to have darçana of the Yoga-péöha in
Mäyäpura-dhäma. So I have made up my mind to take a dip in the sacred Gaìgä at
Mäyäpura first, then take darçana and circumambulate the Yoga-péöha. From there,
I am going to Çréväsäìgana to roll in the sacred dust from the lotus feet of the
Vaiñëavas.”

Overwhelmed, Vrajanätha said, “Uncle, kindly allow me to accompany you. Let us
first meet mother and then proceed to Mäyäpura.” 

Upon their arrival in Mäyäpura, Vijaya and Vrajanätha took a refreshing dip in
the Gaìgä. Exhilarated by this and overcome by profound spiritual feelings,
Vijaya-kumära said, “How fortunate we are! For twenty-four years, Nimäi showered
unrestrained blessings upon Gaìgä devé by sporting in her gentle waves. Today,
we have sanctified our souls in these same waters and feel immense joy.”

The spiritual fervour of Vrajanätha had also ignited and his words gushed out
joyfully, “Dear uncle, it is my great privilege to be here in your august
company. I offer my respects at your feet.”

Upon finishing their bath, they went to Çré Jagannätha Miçra’s house, the
Yoga-péöha. Unable to withhold their swelling spiritual emotions, tears streamed
down in little drops of pearls, adorning their heartfelt prayers to the Lord.

Vijaya-kumära, “Anyone who has taken birth in Gauòa and has not taken the holy
dust of the divine Yoga-péöha upon his head should consider his birth futile.
This is not an exaggeration. Look at this place; it seems ordinary, dotted with
simple straw huts. Nevertheless, by the grace of Çré Gauräìga, we now suddenly
behold the actual divine opulence—imposing gem-studded mansions, surrounded by
exquisite gardens full of fragrant flowers with ornamental archways as the
entranceways. Look around, at these wonderful sights! There, there! See inside
the house! Çré Gauräìga and Çrématé Viñëupriyä Devé are standing beside each
other. How beautiful they are, shining with sublime resplendence!”

Stunned and spellbound by their divine vision, uncle and nephew could not move
and slowly crumbled to the ground as if unconscious. After a long time some
devotees helped them up. Tears flowed freely as they slowly made their way to
Çréväsäìgana. Upon their arrival there, they rolled upon the ground, crying out,
“O Çréväsa! O Advaita Prabhu! My Çré Nityänanda! O beloved Gadädhara and
Gauräìga! Kindly give us your mercy! Purge us of our false egos and arrogance,
and deliver us to your lotus feet!”

The resident Vaiñëavas were amazed at such a display of spiritual emotion by the
two brähmaëas and they responded by dancing ecstatically and loudly chanting,
“All glories to Çré Gauräìga! All glories to the moon of Mäyäpura! All glories
to Çré Nityänanda!”

Vrajanätha went to the kuöéra of his guru and prostrated himself. Taking
Vrajanätha in his arms, Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé firmly embraced him and enquired
mildly, “Why it’s you—at this time of day. Who is this distinguished-looking
person along with you?” While Vrajanätha was explaining everything to his guru,
the other Vaiñëavas arranged seats for everyone in the courtyard with Raghunätha
däsa Bäbäjé to sit under the bakula tree. They then came to the kuöéra and
invited everyone to sit outside in the courtyard. 

Sitting close to Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé with his nephew, Vijaya-kumära humbly
asked, “Mahäräja, how may I attain prayojana?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “You are all very advanced devotees and have profound
realizations. Yet, as you have kindly asked me, I will try to answer your
question as well as I can. Pure bhakti, free from the adulterations of jïäna or
karma is the both the prayojana and the abhidheya, the means to attain the
prayojana. Abhidheya may be divided into two stages: sädhana-bhakti, regulative
devotional service, when the practitioner is at the stage of sädhana, practice;
and prema-bhakti, devotional service imbued with divine love, at the elevated
stage of perfect spiritual consciousness.”

Vijaya, “Revered Bäbäjé, what are the intrinsic symptoms of bhakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has written the great treatise the
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu on the express orders of Çré Caitanya. In verse 1.1.11
the bhakti-svarüpa-lakñaëa, intrinsic symptoms of bhakti, are elucidated:

anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà
jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam
änukülyena kåñëänu-
çélanaà bhaktir uttamä 

“‘One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord, Çré
Kåñëa, favourably and without desire for material profit or gain through karma,
fruitive activities, or jïäna, philosophical speculation. That is çuddha-bhakti,
pure devotional service.’

“This aphorism contains the svarüpa-lakñaëa, intrinsic symptoms, and the
taöasthä-lakñaëa, the marginal symptoms, of çuddha-bhakti. The words bhaktir
uttama are synonymous with çuddha-bhakti. Bhakti adulterated with jïäna and
karma is not çuddha-bhakti. When adulterated with jïäna, bhakti aspires for
mukti, and when adulterated with karma, bhakti strives after bhukti. Hence,
bhakti free from the desires for bhukti and mukti is uttama bhakti, bestowing
prema when correctly practised.

“What exactly is uttama-bhakti? Pure bhakti is to perform devotional service
with body, mind and words with a sustained favourable loving attitude and the
unreserved desire to please Çré Kåñëa. This is the svarüpa-lakñaëa of pure
bhakti. The jéva is endowed with individual capabilities and desires. When the
mercy of Çré Kåñëa and the blessings of the pure devotee reinforce the jéva’s
own capabilities in executing bhakti, then the internal energy of the Supreme
Lord, the svarüpa-çakti, embellishes the jéva with bhäva, transcendental
sentiments. This bhäva enhances the ripening of the svarüpa-lakñaëa. 

“The mind, words and body of the conditioned jéva are mundane, so when the jéva
endeavours to apply them with his own power and level of consciousness, this
only results in materialistic knowledge and dry false renunciation. The symptoms
of çuddha-bhakti are not evoked by such efforts. However, when the svarüpa-çakti
of the Supreme Lord descends and infuses the jéva with bhäva even slightly, then
the symptoms of unalloyed çuddha-bhakti begin to manifest. Çré Kåñëa is the
paramount Divinity; hence, the purest form of bhakti is devotion to Çré Kåñëa.
Worship of Brahman and worship of Paramätmä constitute the paths of jïäna and
karma, not bhakti. 

“Endeavour can be of two kinds: änukülya, favourable; and prätikülya,
unfavourable. Only favourable endeavours are included within the parameters of
actual bhakti. The word änukülya alludes to the lofty and exhilarating feelings
one develops for Çré Kåñëa in all the activities of bhakti. At the stage of
sädhana-bhakti, these feelings are slightly tinged with mundane desire, but at
the perfected stage of prema-bhakti the feelings are cleansed of all material
contamination. In both stages, the symptoms of the bhakti are the same; hence,
favourable devotional service to Çré Kåñëa is the svarüpa-lakñaëa of bhakti. 

“The understanding of the svarüpa-lakñaëa of bhakti is however not complete
without describing the taöasthä-lakñaëa of bhakti. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé
distinguishes two items of taöasthä-lakñaëa: anyäbhiläñitä-çünyaà, freedom from
the desire for non-devotional activities; and jïäna-karmädy-anävåtam, being
unshackled by the bindings of jïäna and karma.

“The aspiration to advance in çuddha-bhakti should be the sole desire in the
heart; any other desires are in forbidding conflict with the principles of pure
bhakti. If the attachment for jïäna, karma, yoga, tyäga, etc., increases, the
heart and consciousness are progressively covered and pure devotional fervour is
driven away. Therefore, these two impediments, karma and jïäna, must be strictly
avoided in the practice of bhakti. Only then can devotional service to Çré Kåñëa
be executed favourably; this is çuddha-bhakti.”

Vijaya, “What are the specific characteristics of bhakti by which a seeker may
recognize çuddha-bhakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has enumerated six specific symptoms
of çuddha-bhakti in the Bhakti-rasämåtä-sindhu, Pürva, 1.12:

kleça-ghné çubha-dä mokña-laghutä-kåt su-durlabhä
sändränanda-viçeñätmä çré-kåñëäkarñiëé ca sä 

“‘Çuddha-bhakti extirpates kleçaghné, distress; çubha-dä, offers good fortune;
mokña-laghutäkåt, exposes the inanity of liberation; su-durlabhä, makes herself
very rarely attainable; sändränanda-viçeñätmä, fills the heart with inexplicable
joy; and çré-kåñëäkarñiëé, attracts Çré Kåñëa.’”

Vijaya, “How does bhakti extirpate distress?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Kleça, distress, is of three types: papa, sin;
papa-béjam, seeds of sin; and avidyä, nescience.

“Papa has three categories: pätaka, sinful; mahä-pätaka, very sinful; and
atipätaka, extremely sinful. When çuddha-bhakti dawns in the heart, one
naturally avoids of all these degrees of sinful activity. The papa-béjam within
the heart prompt one to sin; however, such harmful propensities are expelled
from the heart pulsating with the feelings of çuddha-bhakti. The state when the
jéva has forgotten his svarüpa is known as avidyä. The first stirrings of
çuddha-bhakti enlighten the jéva with the realization that the jéva is an
eternal servant of Kåñëa and thus evaporate svarüpa-bhrama, illusory
misidentification of the self, which is the root of avidyä. Therefore, all three
forms of distress—papa, papa-béjam, and avidyä—are dissipated. Hence, kleçaghné
is a characteristic of bhakti.”

Vijaya, “How is bhakti known as çubha-dä, the bestower of good fortune?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The word çubha, good fortune and auspiciousness, means
to ascend to a position of attracting the love and respect of everyone, to have
available all varieties of pleasures and comforts that bring joy, and to be
adorned with all good qualities. When the heart is imbued with çuddha-bhakti,
the four qualities of humility, compassion, pridelessness, and magnanimous
respect decorate the character of the jéva. As a result, the jéva is loved and
respected by everyone in the world. All the sad-guëas, good qualities,
automatically manifest in the personality of a devotee. Bhakti is competent to
bestow upon the devotee all pleasures and comforts, even material ones, plus the
pleasure of impersonal Brahman realization, plus all the yoga-siddhis, mystic
perfections. The devotees, however, are not attracted to any of these, and so
çuddha-bhakti rewards the pure devotee with the rarest and paramount
bliss—eternal, unlimited ecstasy in the service of Bhagavän.”

Vijaya, “How does bhakti evoke mokña-laghutäkåt, a feeling of disregard for
liberation?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Even a touch of the ecstasy of bhagavad-rati,
spontaneous loving attachment for the Supreme Lord, makes the jéva disinterested
in dharma, artha, käma, and even mokña.”

Vijaya, “Why is bhakti described as su-durlabhä, a rarely attained goal?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “This particular point requires special attention. One
may perform various sädhanas to the best of one’s ability for countless years,
but one will never attain çuddha-bhakti unless one’s bhakti-bhajana becomes free
of discrepancy. The Supreme Lord satisfies most practitioners of spiritual
discipline by offering them either bhukti or mukti. He does not give
çuddha-bhakti to a devotee unless the devotee is highly qualified. 

“By cultivating impersonal brahma-jïäna one is sure to achieve mokña. Similarly,
by performing sacrifices, charitable acts, and pious deeds, one certainly enjoys
earthly and heavenly pleasures. These two allurements make çuddha-bhakti
difficult to obtain. Renouncing these allurements, one must become adept in the
science of Kåñëa consciousness, because no other method can bring success. 

Vijaya, “How may bhakti be called sändränanda-viçeñätmä, the source of
inexplicable ecstasy?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Bhakti is the fountainhead of transcendental ecstasy,
hence it is an unlimited ocean of änanda. Neither the sensual material pleasures
nor the änanda of impersonal Brahman realization multiplied a million times are
equal to a mere drop of ecstasy from the unlimited ocean of bhakti. Gross
material pleasure is dismally insignificant and the bliss of Brahman that one
obtains by achieving mukti after negating such material pleasure is dry and
insipid. Both of these so-called joys are diametrically opposed to the
transcendental divine bliss of çuddha-bhakti—such antipodes should not be
compared. The bliss of çuddha-bhakti is so intense and overpowering that any
other types of happiness, including that of Brahman realization, seem empty and
insignificant—as if a little puddle were to be compared to the vast bottomless
ocean. The pure devotee relishing such ecstasy knows his joys, others can only
speculate.” 

Vijaya, “How does bhakti act to çré-kåñëäkarñiëé, attract Çré Kåñëa?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The devotee whose heart is infused with çuddha-bhakti
attracts the attention of Kåñëa—along with that of all His close associates—by
the power of his love. Love is the only way to conquer Çré Kåñëa, no other means
are viable.”

Vijaya, “Considering that bhakti is such an excellent and expedient method for
spiritual success, why do not all the scholars pondering over the scriptures
care to try it out?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The truth is that the human intellect is limited. Any
purely intellectual attempt to comprehend çuddha-bhakti and Kåñëa
consciousness—which belong to the realm of pure transcendence beyond the mundane
intellect—will result in the opening up of an unbridgeable chasm. However, if a
sincere seeker develops a slight faith and taste for bhakti because of his
previous sukåti, he will swiftly grasp the esoteric import of this
transcendental science. The path of çuddha-bhakti is only accessible to the most
fortunate pious and faithful souls, and no one else.”

Vijaya, “Why do logic, rhetoric, and intellect carry no weight in the endeavour
to understand çuddha-bhakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Intellect and logic are both out of their depth when
trying to gauge the realm of çuddha-bhakti. Therefore, the Vedas warn us with
these verses from the Kathä Upaniñad, 1.2.9:

naiña tarkena matir äpaneyä
proktänyenaiva su-jïänäya preñöha

“‘Dear Naciketä, “This realization, my dear boy, cannot be acquired by logic. It
must be spoken by an exceptionally qualified spiritual master to a knowledgeable
disciple.’

“Furthermore, we find in the Vedänta-sütra, 2.1.11: 

tarkäpratiñöhänät

“‘Transcendental topics cannot be understood by argument or logic. Therefore,
rhetoric is ineffective in helping to understand spiritual subject matters.’

“These statements of the Vedas and Vedänta establish the insignificant position
of logic and argument in revealing the Absolute Truth.”

Vrajanätha, “Is there a path of bhakti that runs between sädhana-bhakti and
prema-bhakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Yes, there is bhäva-bhakti, which means that there are
three stages of bhakti: sädhana-bhakti, bhäva-bhakti, and prema-bhakti.” 

Vrajanätha, “What are the specific symptoms of sädhana-bhakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “In fact, bhakti is one. Prema-bhakti, which is
saturated with the pure consciousness of loving devotional service to Çré Kåñëa,
is the ultimate goal. However, as long as the conditioned jéva executes bhakti
under the influence of the material mind and senses, his endeavour is known as
sädhana-bhakti.”

Vrajanätha, “Yet, have you not said that prema-bhakti is a nitya-siddha-bhäva,
eternally perfect mood, inherent in the spirit soul. Why then does the jéva need
to perform sädhana in order to perfect it?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “This nitya-siddha-bhäva resides within the heart and is
not to be gained from elsewhere—it is not a sädhya external to the very nature
of the jéva. Sädhana is the name given to the method of evoking this
nitya-siddha-bhäva from within the heart. Prema-bhakti does not appear in the
heart of the jéva as long as he is in a conditioned state; thus, the
nitya-siddha-bhäva is temporarily in a covered position from where it needs to
be evoked. In truth, prema-bhakti is nitya-siddha, eternally perfect and present
within the heart.” 

Vrajanätha, “Kindly elucidate this philosophical point in more detail.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Prema-bhakti manifests by the special grace of the
svarüpa-çakti of Çré Kåñëa, hence it is indeed nitya-siddha. Yet, without
conscious effort prema-bhakti is not revealed from within the heart of the
conditioned soul. The efforts and methods undertaken by the jéva to reveal the
presence of prema-bhakti within his heart through the application of the mind,
body, and words are called sädhana-bhakti. During the period of sädhana-bhakti,
the nitya-siddha condition of prema-bhakti may appear to be subservient to the
practice of the rules and regulations of sädhana-bhakti; yet, as soon as
prema-bhakti graciously appears, its nitya-siddha status is clearly evident.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the characteristics of sädhana?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The hallmark of sädhana-bhakti is to repose the mind
upon Çré Kåñëa by every conceivable means.”

Vrajanätha, “How many types of sädhana-bhakti are there?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “There are two types: vaidhé-bhakti and
rägänuga-bhakti.”

Vrajanätha, “Kindly elaborate upon vaidhé-bhakti.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The intrinsic propensity of the jéva for prema-bhakti
is cultivated in two ways. One method of development is through vidhi,
discipline, and is thus known as vaidhé-bhakti. By vidhi is meant adherence to
the rules and regulations of çästra. Hence, vidhi and çästra are synonymous as
the çästra contains all the rules and regulations of the vidhi. Thus, when
bhakti is inspired by çästric stipulations, it is called vaidhé-bhakti.” 

Vrajanätha, “Later I would request you to explain rägänuga-bhakti, yet now
kindly delve further into vaidhé-bhakti.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Çästric stipulations on compulsory observances are
known as vidhi, and those activities forbidden in the çästra are called niñedha.
To execute the vidhis and abstain from the niñedhas is the vaidhé-dharma for the
jéva.”

Vrajanätha, “From your instructions, I have gathered that all çästras advise
humanity to abide by vaidhé-dharma. However, the problem of the jéva,
particularly in Kali-yuga because of his diminished longevity, is that he does
not even have the time to browse through the çästric mountains of vidhi and
niñedha. Is there a çästric maxim that succinctly summarises the essential
vidhis and niñedhas?” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Padma Puräëa, Uttara, 42.103, and the Närada
Païcarätra, 4.2.23, both advise:

smartavyaù satataà viñëur
 vismartavyo na jätucit
sarve vidhi-niñedhäù syur
 etayor eva kiìkaräù 

“‘To always remember the Supreme Lord, Çré Viñëu, is the vidhi, observance, and
to never forget Him, is the niñedha, prohibition. All the other vidhi and
niñedha mentioned in the scriptures must be considered as subordinate
instructions to these two.’

“The esoteric purport is that remembering the Supreme Lord is the fountainhead
of all vidhi. The elaborate and intricate varëäçrama system, a socio-religious
society strongly recommended in the scriptures, is subservient to this principal
vidhi. Similarly, forgetfulness of Çré Viñëu is the principal niñedha.
Instructions against committing sin, restraining the outward projection of
consciousness, and the performance of appropriate penances to counteract sinful
reactions are corollaries to the main vidhi and niñedha, which is remembrance
and non-forgetfulness of Çré Viñëu. Hence, it is to be understood that amongst
all the vidhis, including those governing the varëäçrama social system,
remembrance of the Supreme Lord is the eternal vidhi. This is confirmed in the
Çrémad Bhägavatam, 11.5.2-3:

çré-camasa uväca

mukha-bähüru-pädebhyaù
puruñasyäçramaiù saha
catväro jajïire varëä
guëair viprädayaù påthak

ya eñäà puruñaà säkñäd
ätma-prabhavam éçvaram
na bhajanty avajänanti
sthänäd bhrañöäù patanty adhaù

“‘Çré Camasa said, “Of the four varëas, social orders, the brähmaëas have
emanated from the mouth of the Universal Form of the Supreme Çré Viñëu, the
kñatriyas from His arms, the vaiçyas from His thighs, and the çüdras from His
legs and feet. Each varëa has appeared with specific attributes and äçramas.
When, therefore, within this varëäçrama system the jéva fails to worship the
Supreme Lord and instead becomes puffed up with imagined pride of his mundane
status and begins to disregard the Lord, he is demoted from the human position
and cast down into the depths of depravity.’”

Vrajanätha, “Why would the followers of the varëäçrama social system not render
devotional service to Kåñëa?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé says that out of those who become
disciplined by following the scriptural injunctions of varëäçrama, those who
actually develop faith in bhakti are the only ones that have gained eligibility
for entering and practicing the path of çuddha-bhakti. Such persons are neither
overtly attached to the çästric stipulations of vaidhé-dharma, nor are they
extremely renounced—followers of dry asceticism. In the journey of life, they
observe social etiquette and moral standards to maintain the integrity of the
body and soul, yet, most importantly, they apply themselves to bhakti-sädhana
and accept and reject the objects of this world in light of this pursuit of
çuddha-bhakti. Such eligibility in bhakti is obtained after many lifetimes of
accumulating bhakti-sukåti living within vaidhé-dharma. Those faithful persons
eligible for bhakti are of three categories: uttama-adhikäré, madhyama-adhikäré,
and kanistha-adhikäré.”

Vrajanätha, “According to the Bhagavad-gétä, four types of pious persons are
said to be eligible for practising bhakti: ärtaù, the distressed; jijïäsü, the
inquisitive; arthärthé, those desiring material gain; and jïäné, those situated
in knowledge of the Absolute. For which level of bhakti practice are they
qualified?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “When these four types of men advance along the
spiritual path by sädhu-saìga, they develop çraddhä in pure bhakti. At this
juncture of sädhu-saìga, they gain the adhikära to execute bhakti. In the
scriptures, there are outstanding examples of devotees who progressively rose to
the highest levels of bhakti: Gajendra, Çaunaka Åñi, Dhruva, the four Kumäras,
and so on.”

Vrajanätha, “Do devotees achieve mukti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “There are five kinds of mukti: sälokya, attaining the
planet of Çré Näräyaëa; särñöi, attaining the same opulence as Çré Näräyaëa;
sämépya, attaining the association of Çri Näräyaëa; särüpya, attaining the same
form as Çri Näräyaëa; and säyujya, merging into the Brahman effulgence of Çri
Näräyaëa. 

“Säyujya-mukti, however, is irreconcilably contrary to the precepts of bhakti,
so the devotees Çré Kåñëa do not accept it. Although the other four types of
mukti are not strongly opposed to the precepts of çuddha-bhakti, yet to a
certain extent they possess traits that are counter-productive to the practice
of çuddha-bhakti. Therefore, staunch Kåñëa devotees never aspire for any of
these categories of mukti that fix their ultimate destination only up to
Vaikuëöha, the abode of Çri Näräyaëa. 

“Endeavour for the attainment of these four types of mukti is sometimes
dominated by a mood of seeking one’s own satisfaction, plus desire for
sukhäiçvarya, opulent worship in awe and reverence of the Lord. However, at
other times the endeavour may be infused with prema-sevä, a loving devotional
mood. The sukhäiçvarya mood, what to speak of mukti, is vehemently rejected by
the devotees of Çré Kåñëa. Single-mindedly attracted to Çré Kåñëa, the devotees
are not at all interested in receiving the prasädam of Çré Näräyaëa. Why so?
Although in principle Çré Näräyaëa and Çré Kåñëa are on an equal platform, yet
Çré Kåñëa is the embodiment of the higher spiritual bhäva and rasa.”

Vrajanätha, “Are only äryas, those born within the varëäçrama system, eligible
to take up the path of bhakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Every human being is a fit candidate to take up the
path of bhakti.”

Vrajanätha, “It appears that persons following the varëäçrama system have to
follow two religious duties: to adhere to the rules and regulations of
varëäçrama-dharma; and to practice çuddha-bhakti. Whereas, on the other hand,
those jévas who do not follow the varëäçrama-dharma, being outside that system,
need only practice the duties of çuddha-bhakti. This arrangement appears odd,
because the followers of the varëäçrama system have to execute karma-käëòa
activities, as well as the bhakti-käëòa activities, making life seemingly more
difficult for them. What is the proper understanding of all this?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Those who have attained eligibility for practicing
bhakti and are yet within the varëäçrama system, need only execute the
bhakti-käëòa activities, because bhakti automatically includes the karma-yoga
activities of varëäçrama-dharma. In those cases where the karma-käëòa activities
are contrary to the bhakti-käëòa activities, the karma-käëòa activities are to
be rejected without fear of any adverse repercussions. Generally, the
practitioner of bhakti naturally has no desire to perpetrate vikarma, immoral
sinful activities, or akarma, the disregard of his material duties. If by a
caprice of fate he executes prohibited activities, he is not required to perform
penances to exonerate his misdemeanours. Once bhakti is established within the
heart, sudden or accidental sinful activities cannot take root there; they are
automatically and easily destroyed. Therefore, devotees are not required to
perform the präyaçcitta, penances, of karma-käëòa.”

Vrajanätha, “How then do bhakti-adhikärés, the eligible practitioners of bhakti,
repay their debts to the devas and so on?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “My son, just consider the import of this verse from the
Çrémad Bhägavatam, 11.5.41:

devarñi-bhütäpta-nåëäà pitèëäà
na kiìkaro näyam åëé ca räjan
sarvätmanä yaù çaraëaà çaraëyaà
gato mukundaà parihåtya kartam

“‘O King, one who has given up all material duties and has taken full shelter of
the lotus feet of Mukunda, who offers shelter to all, is not indebted to the
devas, great sages, ordinary living beings, relatives, friends, general mankind,
or even one’s forefathers who have passed away. Since all such classes of living
entities are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, one who has surrendered to the
Lord’s service has no need to serve such persons separately.’ 

“The most important teaching of the Bhagavad-gétä is to be found in sixty-sixth
verse of the eighteenth chapter:

sarva-dharmän parityajya
mäm ekaà çaraëaà vraja
ahaà tväà sarva-päpebhyo
mokñayiñyämi mä çucaù

“‘Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver
you from all sinful reactions. Do not fear.’

“One should simply surrender to the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, who will absolve
the surrendered soul from all sinful reactions. The essence of the Bhagavad-gétä
is that a person who has become worthy of executing çuddha-bhakti need no longer
conform to the rules and regulations of jïäna-çästra and karma-çästra. He
attains complete perfection simply by adhering to the path of çuddha-bhakti.
Therefore, the proclamation of Çré Kåñëa in Bhagavad-gétä, 9.31, must be
recognized as paramount: 

…na me bhaktaù praëaçyati… 

“‘My devotees are never destroyed.’

“The devotee should hold this promise of Çré Kåñëa as infallible.” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé fell into silent contemplation at this point of the
conversation. Quietly speaking with each other, Vrajanätha and Vijaya came to
the firm conviction that jïäna and karma were very insignificant. All doubts
regarding bhakti were cleared in their minds. They understood that the only true
benediction for humanity was the mercy of Bhakti devé, the goddess of
çuddha-bhakti. There was no other alternative.

Vrajanätha then asked Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé very gently, “Dear Gurujé, please
tell us something about the different aìgas, limbs, of çuddha-bhakti.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “My dear Vrajanätha, you have heard the explanations of
the Daça-müla-çikñä up to the eight çloka. Take the time to go over them with
your respected uncle. I am truly happy to see him. I will now proceed to the
ninth Däsa-müla teaching. Please listen carefully:

çrutiù kåñëäkhyänaà smaraëa-nati-püjävidhi-gaëas
tathä däsyaà säkhyaà paricaraëam apy ätma-dadanam
naväìgäny etanéha vidhi-gata-bhakter anudinaà
bhajan çraddhä-yuktaù suvimala-ratià vai sa labhate

“‘One attains pure love and attachment for the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, by daily
and faithfully executing the process of regulative devotional service, which
consists of the following nine limbs: hearing the glories of the Lord, chanting
the glories of the Lord, remembering the Lord, serving His lotus feet,
worshiping the Lord, offering prayers to the Lord, becoming a servitor of the
Lord, considering the Lord one’s friend, and surrendering oneself completely to
the Lord.’

“Applying the ear to the narrations of the name, beauty, qualities and pastimes
of Çré Kåñëa is called çravaëam, hearing. Çravaëam goes through two stages. At
the first stage, the person may hear incidentally the descriptions of name,
form, qualities and pastimes of Çré Kåñëa from the sädhus without any real
degree of çraddhä. However, such hearing, if pursued, gradually evokes çraddhä
in the heart of the hearer and thereby generates a craving to hear more and more
about Çré Kåñëa. At the second stage, the faithful soul develops a deep thirst
to hear only about Çré Kåñëa from the Vaiñëava gurus and sädhus. This constant
hearing with deepening faith matures into the perfection of the realized state.
Çravaëam is the first limb of çuddha-bhakti.

“To utilize the tongue in the glorification of the name, beauty, qualities and
pastimes of Çré Kåñëa is the simplest definition of kértana, chanting. Some of
the different forms of kértana are discussing topics of Kåñëa-consciousness;
chanting kåñëa-näma; reading aloud the scriptures to others; singing devotional
songs; speaking to attract the mind of the people to Çré Kåñëa; speaking with
humility to the Lord; vijïapti, revealing one’s mind to the Lord; chanting
bhajans in glorification of the Lord; and offering prayers to the Lord. Kértana
has been described as the most important of the nine limbs of bhakti. This is
especially true in Kali-yuga. There are repeated references in the scriptures
stating that kértana brings the greatest benefit to humanity. In the Padma
Puräëa, Uttara-khaëòa, 42.25, we find:

dhyäyan kåte yajan yajïais
tretäyäà dväpare ’rcayan
yad äpnoti tad äpnoti
kalau saìkértya keçavam

“‘In Satya-yuga the supreme goal of human life was achieved through meditation,
in Tretä-yuga through the offering of sacrifices, and in Dväpara-yuga through
elaborate Deity worship in the temples. In Kali-yuga, the supreme goal is
achieved only through the pure chanting of kåñëa-näma.’

“The most effective method to purify the heart and consciousness is the chanting
of kåñëa-näma. No other process is as effective. The word saìkértana means, ‘the
congregational chanting of kåñëa-näma.’

“Repeated meditation upon the name, form, qualities and pastimes of Çré Kåñëa is
called smaraëam, remembering. It is of five kinds: smaraëam, short, intermittent
recollection; dhäraëa, purposely withdrawing the mind from other thoughts and
thinking about a specific subject, but in general terms; dhyäna, applying the
mind at length to contemplate particular forms, or qualities of Çré Kåñëa;
dhruvänusmåti, continuous dhyäna like the smooth flowing of nectar; and samädhi,
being absorbed for an extended period with nothing else remaining within the
heart. 

“Çravaëam, kértanam, and smaraëam constitute the backbone of bhakti; all the
other limbs of bhakti are included within these three. Amongst the three
processes, kértanam is the most efficacious because çravaëam and smaraëam can be
practised as parts of kértanam.

“According to the Çrémad Bhägavatam, 7.5.23:

çravaëaà kértanaà viñëoù
smaraëaà päda-sevanam
arcanaà vandanaà däsyaà
sakhyam ätma-nivedanam

“‘Hearing and chanting about the transcendental holy name, form, qualities,
paraphernalia and pastimes of Çré Viñëu, remembering these aspects of the Lord,
serving the lotus feet of the Lord, offering the Lord respectful worship with
sixteen types of paraphernalia, offering prayers to the Lord, becoming His
servant, considering the Lord one’s best friend, and surrendering everything
unto Him (in other words, serving Him with the body, mind and words)—these nine
processes are accepted as pure devotional service.’

“Pädasevanam, rendering menial service, is the fourth limb of bhakti. It has to
be executed with the assistance of çravaëam, kértanam, and smaraëam. It is
imperative to realize that one is hopelessly lacking and unworthy to serve. At
the same time, one has to be aware of the fact that the supreme object of
service is the full embodiment of eternity, absolute knowledge and unlimited
bliss. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé described this topic in detail when he enunciated the
sixty-four limbs of bhakti in his treatise upon bhakti named the
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu. Pädasevanam includes darçana, seeing the transcendental
form of the Lord; touching the body of the Deity; circumambulation of the Deity,
the temple and the dhäma, etc; daily performance of one’s devotional duties; and
visiting the temple of the Lord, the holy rivers such as the Gaìgä and the
sacred pilgrimage places like Puré, Dvärakä, Mathurä and Navadvépa. The worship
of Tulasé devé and the service of the sädhus also belong to pädasevanam as well.

“The fifth of the nine limbs of bhakti is arcana, Deity worship. There are many
considerations concerning the procedures and the eligibility for this limb of
bhakti. If a devotee who has already practised çravaëam, kértanam and smaraëam
develops strong faith in the Deity form of the Lord and thereby an urge to
perform arcana, then he should approach his guru for instruction and the
necessary mantra initiation. Thereafter, he may be engaged in arcana.”

Vrajanätha, “Mahäräja, what is the difference between näma, the holy names, and
mantra, incantation?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Näma is the life and soul of a mantra. The great sages
have attached suffixes and prefixes such as namaù to the transcendental names.
Thus, the sages have given us mantras that evoke specific powers of harinäma and
establish particular relationships with the Supreme Lord. 

“Truly, harinäma is entirely transcendental and impartial; thus, He may be
chanted by anyone. However, the jéva is entrapped in mäyä by his false
identification with the body and matter. To help release the consciousness of
the jéva from the grips of matter and put the consciousness upon the spiritual
path, the process of Deity worship with the chanting of specific potent mantras
has been laid out in the çästra and by the sages. Hence, mantra-dékçä is
necessary for materialistic men who desire to be engaged in arcana. 

“Initiation into kåñëa-mantra is the most auspicious blessing for all humanity;
out of all the mantras that exist, kåñëa-mantra is the most potent and
effective. To chant kåñëa-mantra there is no need to accept the various
purificatory processes known as siddha, sädhya, susiddha, and ari. When the jéva
receives initiation into kåñëa-mantra from a bona fide elevated guru, he
immediately becomes the recipient of the divine potency of Çré Kåñëa. The
inquisitive initiate then receives instructions about the procedures of arcana
from his guru. At this point in our discussions, not all the details of arcana
need be described. In brief, it may be said that the observance of Çré
Kåñëa-janmäñöamé, Kärttika-vrata, Ekädaçé-vrata, Mägha-snäna, and other vows are
incorporated within arcana. Along with serving and worshiping Çré Kåñëa, one
thing is indispensable: His pure devotee must also be served and worshiped. 

“Vandana is the sixth of the nine limbs of bhakti. Although it may be included
within the other limbs, such as within kértanam or pädasevanam, it has also been
given a separate status. Vandana means to offer namaskära, obeisances with
heartfelt prayers. There are of two kinds of namaskära: ekaëga-namaskära,
offering obeisances with folded hands—that is with one part of the body whilst
standing before the Lord; and añtanga-namaskära, offering prostrate
obeisances—that is with all eight parts of the body. 

“However, there are also offences to be avoided while offering namaskära, such
as one-handed salutations; prostrated obeisances with covered upper torso;
prostrating in front and in line with the Lord’s vision, that is head-on;
prostrating from behind the Lord; prostrating with the Deities to one’s right
side; and prostrating inside the temple Deity room.

“Däsyam, considering oneself to be a servitor of the Lord, is the seventh limb
of bhakti. The ideal way to meditate and worship is to be imbued with feelings
of eternal servitude towards Çré Kåñëa. Offering prayers, obeisances, and the
fruits of all one’s labours; menial service; proper devotional conduct;
remembering the Lord; hearing about his pastimes and glories; and other such
activities in the mood of eternal servitude to the Lord are the items of däsyam.

“Säkhyam, making friendship with the Lord, is the eight limb of bhakti. As a
friend of the Lord, the devotee is always attentive to take care of the Lord’s
needs. Säkhyam is divided into two categories: vaidhaëga-säkhyam, friendship
regulated by discipline and reverence; and rägäëga-säkhyam, spontaneous,
friendly affection and regard. Here, säkhyam refers only to vaidhaëga-säkhyam,
comprising the attachment and friendship a devotee develops towards the Lord
whilst worshiping the Deity.

“Ätmä-nivedana is the ninth limb of bhakti. It is the complete surrender of the
pure mind, body and words to Çré Kåñëa. The hallmark of this limb is that the
devotee gives up all types of endeavours for himself and applies himself solely
for the sake of Çré Kåñëa. Just as a cow that may be freely bought and sold in
the market place remains dependent upon the will of her master in the matters of
activity and maintenance, similarly, the surrendered devotee remains fully
dependent upon the will of Çré Kåñëa and simply desires whatever Kåñëa desires.
This theme is echoed in the words of the Çrémad Bhägavatam, 9.4.19-20:

sa vai manaù kåñëa-padäravindayor
vacäàsi vaikuëöha-guëänuvarëane
karau harer mandira-märjanädiñu
çrutià cakäräcyuta-sat-kathodaye

mukunda-liìgälaya-darçane dåçau
tad-bhåtya-gätra-sparçe ’ìga-saìgamam
ghräëaà ca tat-päda-saroja-saurabhe
çrémat-tulasyä rasanäà tad-arpite

pädau hareù kñetra-padänusarpaëe
çiro håñékeça-padäbhivandane
kämaà ca däsye na tu käma-kämyayä
yathottamaçloka-janäçrayä ratiù 

“‘Mahäräja Ambaréña always engaged his mind in taking shelter at the lotus feet
of Çré Kåñëa; his words in describing the spiritual world and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; his hands in cleansing and washing the Lord’s temple;
his ears in hearing topics about the Supreme Lord; his eyes in seeing the Deity
of Çré Kåñëa in the temple; his body in touching the lotus feet of Vaiñëavas and
embracing them; his nostrils in smelling the aroma of tulasé leaves offered to
Kåñëa’s lotus feet; his tongue in tasting prasädam, food offered to Kåñëa; his
legs in going to places of pilgrimage like Våndävana and Mathurä or the Lord’s
temple; and his head in touching the lotus feet of the Lord and in offering Him
prayers. Thus, Mahäräja Ambaréña desired only to serve the Lord faithfully. In
this way, he engaged his senses and his transcendental loving propensity
completely in the Lord’s service.’”

Vrajanätha and Vijaya-kumära were exhilarated by the explanations of Çré
Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé and fell prostrate before him in awed affection. 

Vrajanätha said, “Gurudeva, truly you are a bhägavata-pärñada, an eternal and
intimate associate of the Lord. We have received immense good fortune from your
nectarean instructions. All this time we have wasted our lives in futile
academic pursuits and in wallowing in the false prestige of a noble birth.
Surely on the strength of piety accumulated over many life-times, we have been
given the shelter of your lotus feet.” 

Vijaya-kumära said, “O Gurudeva, you are a stalwart amongst the pure devotees of
the Lord. Çréla Våndävana däsa Öhäkura personally instructed me to come to Çré
Dhäma Mäyäpura and see the sacred birthplace of the Lord. His blessings have
enabled me to see the Lord’s transcendental abode and associate with His eternal
companion. With your kind permission, Mahäräja, we would like to visit you again
tomorrow evening.” 

The elderly Bäbäjé prostrated himself with amazing alacrity when the name of
Çréla Våndävana däsa Öhäkura was mentioned. Slowly returning to his sitting
position, he said, “Çréla Våndävana däsa Öhäkura is the revered author of the
biography of my beloved Lord and a direct incarnation of Çréla Vyäsadeva for
this purpose. I offer him my repeated obeisances.”

Both uncle and nephew had forgotten the time. They suddenly noticed that it was
late noon—the hours had flown by. After begging leave of Çré Raghunätha däsa
Bäbäjé, Vrajanätha and Vijaya-kumära returned to the home of Vrajanätha.

Thus ends the nineteenth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma:
Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana, Part Seven: An Analysis of Abhidheya, the
Means of Attainment of Prema

JDH 20: Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Chapter Twenty
Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Part Eight: Abhidheya: Vaidhé Sädhana Bhakti, the Practice of Regulative
Devotional Service 

Vrajanätha and Vijaya-kumära arrived home at 2 p.m. Vrajanätha’s mother had made
special lunch preparations for her brother and served him personally. After
lunch, the uncle and nephew withdrew to a quiet place where they could exchange
their views of the scriptures and the instructions they had received from the
advanced Vaiñëavas. They felt a warm affection for each other. Upon hearing the
earlier instructions that Vrajanätha had received from Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé,
Vijaya-kumära remarked, “You are very fortunate, because you have heard such
wonderful philosophy from such a great soul. Actually, hearing about Çré Kåñëa
and devotional topics always brings immense good fortune, but when the same is
heard from the lips of a pure devotee, the beneficial results are almost
immediate. My son, you are a topmost expert in the scriptures, especially in
nyäya. By birth, you belong to the upper ranks of the brähmaëa class. You are
wealthy—look at the property you have inherited. Yet, highest of all, you have
now taken shelter of a pure Vaiñëava devotee and have developed a taste for
kåñëa-kathä; therefore, all these material facilities have now become added
embellishments.”

While the two men were talking, Vrajanätha’s mother quietly slipped into the
next room and, without being seen by Vrajanätha, caught her brother’s attention,
signalling him to talk to her privately. When Vijaya-kumära came to her, she
said, “My brother, I have not seen you for such a long time. May I ask of you a
favour? You must convince Vrajanätha to take a wife. I have observed him lately
and it chills my heart to see that his behaviour indicates a disinterest in
marriage. The family matchmaker has made several propositions, but he is
unbending as a mountain. My mother-in-law has also tried her best, but in vain.”

After listening patiently to his sister, Vijaya-kumära replied, “I am going to
stay here for another two weeks, so I shall judge the situation and then advise
you on what should be done. For now, let us leave things as they are and carry
on with everything quite normally.” When his sister had left, Vijaya went back
to Vrajanätha to continue their spiritual discussion, which took up the rest of
the day and continued non-stop until noon lunch the next day. The only time they
stopped was for eating, bathing and sleeping. 

After lunch, Vijaya-kumära said, “This evening, we will go to Çréväsäìgana and
hear from the revered Çré Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé Mahäräja an elaboration upon
the sixty-four limbs of bhakti as described by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé. Vrajanätha, I
am so delighted to have your association, and I pray to have your association,
life after life. Without your help, I would never have received such nectarean
spiritual instructions. 

“Bäbäjé Mahäräja said that there were two paths of sädhana-bhakti—vaidhé-märga
and räga-märga. Everything indicates that we are on the path of vaidhé-märga.
Before we go further and onto räga-märga, let us acquire a proper understanding
of vaidhé-märga and how to apply this discipline in real life. Yesterday Bäbäjé
Mahäräja explained the nine limbs of bhakti, but I am still not sure how to
transform those instructions into action. Today, I want to get a concrete grasp
on the subject.”

Spiritual topics never end, especially when two enthusiastic devotees are
seriously discussing them. The sun eventually grew ruddy and weary, and ready to
set. The two devotees, uncle and nephew, took this as a sign to prepare for
their walk to Çréväsäìgana. Loudly chanting harinäma all the way, they finally
arrived at Çréväsäìgana. After offering respectful obeisances to all the
resident Vaiñëavas, they entered Çré Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé’s simple dwelling—a
small, clean kuöéra.

Çré Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé always felt great exultation when he saw sincere
devotees with earnest questions. He stood up to greet the two seekers of
knowledge and embraced them warmly, pointing out two straw-mats for them to sit
upon. Vrajanätha and Vijaya-kumära prostrated themselves reverentially before
Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé and sat down quietly. After a preliminary exchange of
polite remarks referring to the practice of spiritual life, Vijaya-kumära, eager
to have his questions answered, respectfully turned to Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé
and said, “Çréla Gurudeva, please excuse us for troubling you with so many
questions. You are like a father to us, so kindly tolerate these torments. We
are keen to understand the sixty-four limbs of devotion as enumerated by Çréla
Rüpa Gosvämé. Some of those sixty-four you have already explained to us, I
believe.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé was slightly amused and a light smile played upon his
lips. He began to speak, “The first ten of the sixty-four limbs form a group
which may be called the ‘initial activities’ and thus prompt the positive
actions of bhakti-yoga. They are (1) accepting the shelter of a bona-fide
spiritual master; (2) receiving initiation and instructions in Kåñëa
consciousness from him; (3) obeying the orders of the spiritual master with
faith and devotion; (4) following in the footsteps of the previous äcäryas; (5)
enquiring about devotional service from the spiritual master; (6) giving up
sense gratification for Çré Kåñëa’s satisfaction and service; (7) living in the
dhäma, a holy place of Kåñëa’s pastimes, e.g. Navadvépa or any other site upon
the banks of the Gaìgä or Yamunä; (8) engaging in occupational duties just to
maintain body and soul together, accepting just what is necessary; (9) observing
vows on religious occasions connected to Çré Kåñëa (Ekädaçé, Janmäñöamé); and
(10) worshiping sacred trees (tulasé, dhätré, banyan), cows, Vaiñëavas, and
brähmaëas.

“The next ten are actions that must be definitely avoided: (11) associating with
those who are materialistic or inimical to Kåñëa and His devotees; (12) overtly
endeavouring to get disciples, not instructing disciples, and initiating
unworthy disciples; (13) ostentatiously displaying external pomp and
celebration, over-endeavouring to construct costly temples and äçramas; (14)
collecting a large number of non-devotional books, quoting and analysing
extensively from many different and unauthorized literatures; (15) being
miserly, neglectful and capricious in ordinary material dealings; (16)
succumbing to sorrow, frustration and so on; (17) showing disrespect to the
devas and devés; (18) frightening and causing anxiety to other living entities;
(19) committing sevä-aparädha, offences in devotional service, and nämäparädha,
offences to harinäma; and (20) tolerating blasphemy of Çré Kåñëa and His
devotees. These twenty limbs of bhakti are compared to portals leading to the
path of çuddha-bhakti. However, the first three—taking shelter, being initiated
and instructed by, and obeying a bona fide guru with faith and devotion—are the
most important. 

“The remaining forty-four are observed to increase one’s bhakti. They are (21)
decoration of the body with the Vaiñëava signs of tilaka and tulasé beads; (22)
one may write kåñëa-näma upon the body; (23) to wear flower garlands and other
objects offered to the Lord, known as nirmala, spotlessly pure; (24) to dance
before the Deities of the Lord; (25) to prostrate oneself before the Deities of
the Lord; (26) one stood stand up and greet the Deities and one’s guru as a mark
of respect; (27) following the procession behind the Deity and guru; (28)
visiting Çré Kåñëa’s temple and His sacred dhämas; (29) circumambulating the
temple, Deity, and dhäma, etc.; (30) arcana, offering worship to the Deity; (31)
rendering voluntary humble service to the Deity, the Vaiñëavas, etc.; (32) to
sing bhajans and kértanas in glorification of the Lord; (33) to participate in
saìkértana; (34) to chant japa, e.g. the gäyatré-mantra after äcamana,
purificatory performance; (35) to submit oneself to the Lord with prayers and
feelings of humility and meekness; (36) reciting choice and authorised, notable
prayers from the scriptures such as the Çrémad Bhägavatam; (37) honouring and
relishing prasädam, food offered to Kåñëa; (38) to drink caraëämåta, the water
used to bathe the Deity; (39) one should smell the incense, flowers, etc.,
offered to the Lord; (40) touching the lotus feet of the Deity (by those
properly initiated); (41) darçana, i.e. seeing the Deity, and taking the sight
of the Deity; (42) participating in the ärati, ceremony of worship, and other
celebrations of the Deity; (43) to hear about the name, beauty, qualities and
pastimes of the Lord; (44) to wait patiently for the Lord to shower His mercy;
(45) to practice remembrance of the Lord and His pastimes; (46) to meditate upon
the service, form, qualities and pastimes of the Lord; (47) to adopt a mood of
constant servitorship towards the Lord; (48) to perform service in friendship;
(49) to surrender oneself totally to the Lord; (50) to offer, as gifts to the
Deity, items that are dear to oneself; (51) making every endeavour for Kåñëa’s
satisfaction, even taking great risks in the service of Kåñëa; (52) in every
condition, being a surrendered soul taking complete shelter in Kåñëa; (53) to
serve sacred trees, especially watering the tulasé tree, as she is most dear to
Kåñëa; (54) to respect the Bhägavatam and other revealed scriptures—Itihäsas,
Puräëas, Upaniñads, etc., knowing that they present the words of Kåñëa; (55) to
serve Kåñëa’s birth-place Mathurä and other dhämas, because of their
relationship with the pastimes of Kåñëa; (56) to serve the Vaiñëavas because
they are most dear to Kåñëa; (57) in accordance with one’s ability, one should
perform service and observe festivals in the company of saintly souls; (58)
observing vows like the Kärttika-vrata and other devotional vows; (59) to
celebrate joyfully the Lord’s birthday (Janmäñöamé, Rämanavamé, etc.) and other
festivals; (60) serving and worshipping the Deities with faith; (61) to study
and relish the discourses upon the Bhägavatam and other scriptures given by
elevated rasikä devotees steeped in the transcendental pastimes of Çré Kåñëa;
(62) to associate with peaceful, elevated Vaiñëavas more advanced than oneself
and who are of the same spiritual mellow as oneself; (63) to chant kåñëa-näma
with love; and (64) to reside in the holy dhäma Mathurä, or a another place
where Kåñëa reveals his pastimes, only for the purpose of kåñëa-bhakti.

“The last five have been already described within the other limbs, but on
account of their pre-eminence they have been repeated separately. All these
limbs of bhakti must be introduced completely into one’s devotional practice
with body, senses and inner consciousness. From the twenty-first to the
forty-ninth limb, we find instructions concerning kåñëa-mantra dékñä, initiation
into the worship of Çré Kåñëa.”

Vijaya, “Bäbäjé Mahäräja, kindly elaborate upon the very first limb: to take
shelter of a bona fide guru.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “A prerequisite for an aspirant of çuddha-bhakti is to
become fully eligible. To achieve eligibility, he has to seek, enquire and hear
submissively from a Vaiñëava who is well versed in the science of pure devotion,
Kåñëa consciousness. Any jéva gifted with çraddhä, created by such association,
is eligible for çuddha-bhakti. Sukåti accumulated in many lifetimes, guides a
person to saintly souls who talk upon spiritual topics. Hearing these topics
from the pure Vaiñëava will purify and create çraddhä in the heart of the
aspiring jéva. With the growth of çraddhä, the jéva develops çaraëäpatti, the
spirit of surrender to Çré Kåñëa. Faith and the spirit of surrender are
practically the same concepts.

“Devotion to Kåñëa is the topmost spiritual path and of the greatest value. The
eligibility for çuddha-bhakti arises from sincere and firm faith in the Lord,
which evokes the following six symptoms of surrender: (1) accepting duties and
activities favourable to bhakti; (2) rejecting activities detrimental to bhakti;
(3) knowing that Kåñëa is the sole protector; (4) accepting Kåñëa as the only
maintainer; (5) regarding oneself as meek and humble and dependent upon Kåñëa;
and (6) not having a will separate or independent to that of Kåñëa and thus
wishing to perform whatever Çré Kåñëa desires. A person who thinks in this
manner has firm faith. He is qualified to engage in unalloyed devotional
service.

“As the jéva becomes more eligible, he becomes more eager to learn and practice
çuddha-bhakti. Thus, he accepts the äçrayä, shelter, of a bona fide guru. The
Vedas state in the Muëòaka Upaniñad, 1.2.12:

tad vijïänärthaà sa gurum eväbhigacchet
samit-päëiù çrotriyaà brahma-niñöham 

“‘He, the sincere practitioner, must attach himself to the process of the
science of devotion. He must humbly approach, with a gift for sacrifice, a bona
fide spiritual master who is well-versed in the conclusion of the Vedas and who
has realized the science of Kåñëa consciousness.’

“The Chändogya Upaniñad, 6.14.2, states:

äcäryavän puruño veda

“‘Only the person who receives proper initiation from an äcärya, the perfect
spiritual master, is realized in Brahman.’

“The Hari-bhakti-viläsa has extensively delved into the topic of who is a bona
fide guru and who is a çiñya, sincere disciple. The main symptoms of an ideal
çiñya are that he must have a righteous character and be faithful and sincere.
The model guru must be an exponent and practitioner of çuddha-bhakti, well
versed in bhakti-tattva. He must have a spotless, saintly character, must be
guileless, bereft of greed, simple, uncontaminated by the mäyäväda philosophy,
and expert in all his spiritual duties. If a brähmaëa, well respected in
society, is crowned with such wonderful qualities, he automatically becomes a
guru for all the different varëas. If there is not such a guru available, the
disciple is directed to find a guru of a higher caste than himself from whom to
take initiation.

“However, the real consideration—apart from such caste etiquette—is that one who
knows Kåñëa in truth, being realized in Kåñëa consciousness, should be accepted
by the sincere disciple as a bona fide guru. The disciple should to surrender to
a guru of this primary qualification. Brähmaëas who are proud of their high
status in this caste conscious material world may prefer to accept a spiritual
master who is also a brähmaëa, thus finding it easier to accept such a high
caste guru as superior. However, the actual truth is that any properly qualified
devotee of Çré Kåñëa is a bona fide guru. 

“The scriptures have also described a preliminary time of mutual testing between
the guru and the disciple. The guru should see that the disciple has become
eligible to enter the path of çuddha-bhakti by his sincerity, faith and respect.
In addition, the disciple by his examination should develop the faith in his
heart that the guru is truly a qualified pure devotee of the Lord. Seeing the
faith and respectful behaviour of the sincere disciple, the bona fide spiritual
master then bestows his mercy.

“There are two categories of gurus: the dékñä-guru, initiating guru; and the
çikñä-guru, instructing guru. The disciple accepts dékñä from the dékñä-guru and
from him learns the process of arcana. The dékñä-guru is one and one only, but
there can be numerous çikñä-gurus. The dékñä-guru may also give çikñä to his
disciple as a çikñä-guru.”

Vijaya, “The scriptures forbid giving up the dékñä-guru. However, if he is
incapable of imparting proper knowledge of devotion and of Vaiñëava etiquette,
how can he be in a position to teach?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Before a person accepts formal initiation from a guru,
he must test the guru as to whether he is well-versed in the Vedas and in the
science of the Supreme Absolute Truth. Only such a bona fide guru is indeed able
to instruct his disciple in all matters. It is true that the dékñä-guru should
not be rejected, but there are two bona fide reasons to give him up. 

“First, if for some reason or another at the time of initiation the disciple did
not recognize the devotional calibre of the guru and later found out that the
guru was neither conversant with the conclusions of çästra, nor a Vaiñëava, so
that he, the disciple, could not make any spiritual progress, then he, the
disciple, should reject the unqualified guru. Many scriptural sources support
this course of action, for example, the Närada Païcarätra, as cited in
Hari-bhakti-viläsa, 1.62, states:

yo vyakti nyäya rahitam 
anyäyena çåëoti yaù
täv ubhau narakaà ghoraà 
vrajataù kälam akñayam

“‘Any person posing as an äcärya, but speaking unauthorized philosophy contrary
to the teachings of the çästra and any one who claims to be his disciple and
hears such, thereby lending credibility to such nonsense, both of these are
bound for Hell.’

“The Mahäbhärata, Udyoga-parva, 179.25, explains in the story of Ambä:

guror apy avaliptasya
käryäkäryam ajänataù
utpatha-pratipannasya
parityägo vidhéyate 

“‘A person who is wallowing in carnal pleasures and material comforts, who is
confused about the human goal of life and is devoid of bhakti, and who poses as
a guru, such a depraved charlatan must be rejected.’

“Another quotation from the Hari-bhakti-viläsa, 4.144:

avaiñëavopadiñöena
 mantreëa nirayaà vrajet
punaç ca vidhinä samyag
grähayed vaiñëaväd guroù 

“‘If one receives mantra-dékñä from a non-Vaiñëava who runs after women and is
bereft of devotion to Çré Kåñëa, one is certainly doomed to Hell. Therefore, one
must immediately act according to scriptural injunctions and take re-initiation
from a real, properly qualified, Vaiñëava guru.’

“The second reason is that if a guru who was a Vaiñëava and knowledgeable in
Kåñëa consciousness at the time of initiation becomes a mäyävädé and a
Vaiñëava-hater as a result of bad association or otherwise, or he behaves
immorally and sinfully, then the disciple must give him up.

“However, if the guru is neither inimical to Vaiñëavas, nor a mäyävädé, nor
addicted to sinful activities, but however lacks knowledge of the scriptures,
then his meagre scriptural understanding should not be a cause for rejection. In
this case, the disciple may approach his guru with due deference to procure his
permission to receive spiritual knowledge and instructions from an advanced,
pure Vaiñëava, and thus engage in serving and learning from the knowledgeable
Vaiñëava.”

Vijaya, “What are the usual procedures for the second limb of devotional
service, which is receiving dékñä in kåñëa-mantra and çikñä in the science of
Kåñëa consciousness from the guru.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “One must take çikñä from his guru in arcana and
çuddha-bhakti as enunciated in the Çrémad Bhägavatam. Thus, one should be
trained to execute kåñëa-sevä favourably and regularly, and with heartfelt
simplicity, one should cultivate kåñëa-prema. The progressive steps of arcana we
will discuss in a later presentation. It is certainly indispensable that one
receive çikñä from the guru in the bhakti concepts of sambandha, abhidheya, and
prayojana.”

Vijaya, “Kindly explain the third limb, how to serve the guru with faith and
devotion?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “One should not see the guru as an ordinary mortal human
being, but as a representative of Çré Kåñëa and the best of and the embodiment
of all the devas. One should never disobey the orders of the guru, nor
disrespect him in any way. Know that he is guru-tattva, an expansion of the
transcendental Vaikuëöha principle, a resident of the spiritual world.”

Vijaya, “What is the meaning of the fourth limb, following in the footsteps of
the previous äcäryas?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “According to the precepts of sädhana-bhakti, the
devotee should use each and every means to attach his mind to Çré Kåñëa.
However, one should follow the path endorsed by the previous äcäryas. Such a
path is without distress; it is the source of peace and benediction and is the
easy straight road of advancement. 

“We learn from the Skanda Puräëa:

sa mågyaù çreyasäà hetuù 
panthäù santäpavarjitaù
anaväpta-çramaà pürve 
yena santaù pratasthire 

“‘The path which was fiercely tread by the previous äcäryas and spiritual
stalwarts is a must for all to follow, because this path alone will bring
spiritual benediction and peace from the pangs of material existence.’

“The correct path cannot be properly discovered and charted by any single
individual. Therefore, a succession of äcäryas has clarified the areas of
difficulty, which may have been clouding the path of çuddha-bhakti. Thus, now
the path of bhakti is finely defined and ready to be followed by all. 

“The Brahma-yämala describes:

çruti-småti-puräëädi-
païcarätra-vidhià vinä
aikäntiké harer bhaktir
utpätäyaiva kalpate

“‘Even single-minded devotional service to the Lord that ignores the tenets of
authorized Vedic literatures like the Upaniñads, Puräëas, Närada Païcarätra,
etc., simply creates an unnecessary disturbance in society.’”

Vijaya, “Respected Gurujé, kindly explain how even single-minded devotion to the
Supreme Lord can be the cause of disturbance.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Real, single-minded, actual devotion is possible only
when one is traversing the path of çuddha-bhakti as formulated by the previous
äcäryas. Any other method, or a new concocted path, simply leads to a dead end.
Inexperienced and myopic preachers such as Dattätreya, Buddha, and other recent
speculative thinkers could not properly comprehend the science of çuddha-bhakti.
Yet, they have ventured to deviate from the authorized path, thus warping it,
and have selected whimsically at random a little here and there from the
original established ideas. One group has added impersonal mäyävädé thought to
the path, whilst the other has practically destroyed it with voidistic atheism.
Such teachers imagined that these horrible and ugly falsely established
philosophies would foster single-minded devotion to the Supreme Lord. However,
this is untrue and mistaken; such perversion of the truth cannot evoke
çuddha-bhakti, but only chaos and disturbance.

“The cultivation of räga-bhakti, spontaneous devotional service, does not depend
upon an adherence to the regulations and stipulations as enunciated in the
çruti, småti, puräëas, and païcarätra scriptures, which are especially earmarked
for the practice of vaidhé-bhakti. Elevated devotees performing räga-bhakti are
required to follow the eternally liberated residents of Vraja-dhäma in the
spiritual world. However, for the devotees on the level of vaidhé-bhakti, it is
imperative to follow the examples of the great spiritual stalwarts like Dhruva,
Prahläda, Närada, Vyäsadeva, Çukadeva Gosvämé, and so on. Hence, especially for
the devotees following vaidhé-bhakti, the only authorized method is to follow in
the footsteps of previous äcäryas.”

Vijaya, “What is the fifth limb, sad dharma-jijïäsä, enquiring from the
spiritual master about how to advance in devotional service?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Persons who are very eager to understand and practice
spiritual life may quickly attain all their spiritual desires. Eagerness means
that the vaidhé-bhakti devotee enthusiastically asks the guru to explain the
duties and practices of spiritual life in accordance with the directions of
previous äcäryas.”

Vijaya, “What is the meaning of sixth limb, to renounce sense-gratification and
material comfort for the sake of Çré Kåñëa?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Bhoga, sense-gratification, means to cater to the
demands of the senses in an enjoying spirit and stands as a formidable obstacle
to spiritual progress. If one renounces bhoga to advance in spiritual discipline
for the attainment of Çré Kåñëa, it is certainly most beneficial, making the
path of one’s advancement smooth. This tendency towards bhoga is an addiction
that constantly increases its hold upon the addict and is thus a great stumbling
block to the execution of çuddha-bhakti. Therefore, a devotee must restrict his
eating to only kåñëa-prasädam and to an amount just suitable for the healthy
maintenance of his body, thus allowing him to practice çuddha-bhakti
enthusiastically. On spiritual festivals and Ekädaçé, he must fast and give up
all sense enjoyments. In this way, he must train himself to eliminate the desire
for sensual pleasure.”

Vijaya, “What is the significance of residing in the dhäma, for example, Dvärakä
or Våndävana, or living upon the banks of the Gaìgä and Yamunä Rivers, the
seventh limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The dhämas are places where the Supreme Lord appears
and displays His transcendental pastimes. The territories lying on either bank
of the holy rivers are spiritually enlivening. Therefore, residing in these
sanctified places naturally inspires a higher level of spiritual activity and
devotion.”

Vijaya, “Is staying in Navadvépa spiritually advantageous because it is situated
on the Gaìgä, or for other reasons also?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Ah yes! Taking residence anywhere in the thirty-two
square mile area of Navadvépa is equivalent to staying in the holiest of lands,
Çré Våndävana. Within Navadvépa, it is especially beneficial to live in
Mäyäpura. There are seven holy places, which award liberation: Ayodhyä, Mathurä,
Mäyäpura, Käçé, Käïcé, Avanté, and Dvärakä. Amongst these, Mäyäpura is the most
important abode. 

“When Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu descended to this material world, He brought His
own original abode of Çvetadvépa, that is Mäyäpura, with Him. Four centuries
after Çré Caitanya’s advent, this Çvetadvépa will gain pre-eminence over all
other places of pilgrimage in the world. The benefit of residing in Navadvépa is
that all offences are nullified and the resident is crowned with çuddha-bhakti.
Çréla Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté has accorded Navadvépa the same spiritual status
as Våndävana, but actually he has given many examples to show that Navadvépa may
be considered even more elevated in some respects.”

Vijaya, “How can we understand the eighth limb: engaging in occupational duties
just to maintain body and soul together, accepting just what is necessary?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Näradéya Puräëa states:

yävatä syät sva-nirvähaù 
své-kuryät tävad artha-vit
ädhikye nyünatäyäà ca 
‘cyavate paramärthataù

“‘A person who understands the real goal of human life will accept material
possessions proportionate to his needs; any more or any less material wealth
will divert him from his ultimate destination.’

“The sädhaka qualified for vaidhé-bhakti must pursue an honest profession in
accordance with his varëäsrama duties whilst engaging in bhakti-bhajana. One
should acquire material possessions and wealth only according to one’s
necessity. Accumulating in excess or eagerly striving after material possessions
simply increases the elements of attachment and greed. Subsequently one’s
affinity for matter will grow and neutralize one’s progress in bhajana.
Similarly, if one accepts less than one needs for the convenient performance of
one’s bhajana, the result will be the same, namely the retardation of Kåñëa
consciousness. Therefore, until one is qualified for complete detachment one
must lead a balanced life and accept wealth and possessions only to maintain
one’s body and soul together in the pursuit of çuddha-bhakti.” 

Vijaya, “How should a devotee observe hari-väsara, the ninth limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Pure Ekädaçé days are known as hari-väsara. The impure
viddha-ekädaçé days are not to be observed. When there is a viddha-ekädaçé then
the following day known as mahä-dvädaçé is to be observed. The process of
observing Ekädaçé vows is as the following: one should be celibate from the day
prior to Ekädaçé until the day after Ekädaçé, i.e. three days; on Ekädaçé, one
should fast fully even giving up water; also on the Ekädaçé night, one should
stay up to hear and chant; and the morning after Ekädaçé, one should break one’s
fast during the specified time period. 

“Ekädaçé fasting means that one should not take even mahä-prasäda. If someone is
sick, there is anukalpa as a concession, i.e. one frugal and light meal may be
taken according to the prescribed method described in the Hari-bhakti-viläsa, in
the passage starting at 9.27: …naktaà haviñyännaà… ‘After sunset, fruits,
vegetables, milk, nuts, etc., can be eaten in exiguous quantity, but not
grains.’”

Vijaya, “Why do the dhätré, myrobalan tree, and the peepul tree, etc., have a
special worshipable status, as in the tenth limb?” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Skanda Puräëa states:

açvattha-tulasé-dhätré-go-bhümi-sura-vaiñëaväù
püjitäù praëatä-dhyätäù kñapayanti nånäm agham 

“‘All of one’s sins are absolved, if one worships, offers obeisances to, and
meditates upon the sacred peepul, banyan, tulasé, and dhätré trees, and the cow,
brähmaëas, and Vaiñëavas.’

“As a part of maintaining household life within the varëäsrama social system,
the vaidhé-bhakti devotee must worship, respect, and meditate upon the banyan,
peepul and other shade-giving trees; the dhätré (myrobalan) and other
fruit-bearing trees; tulasé and other plants inspiring devotion; the cow and
other universally beneficial animals; the brähmaëas, who teach religion and
maintain religious principles; and the Vaiñëavas, the devotees of the Lord who
purify the whole world.”

Vijaya, “Kindly explain what is meant by avoiding the association of those who
are materialistic or inimical to Çré Kåñëa and His devotees, the eleventh limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The growth of bhäva intensifies one’s pure devotion to
the Lord. As long as the devotee has not yet attained the stage of bhäva, he has
to shun the company of atheists and non-devotees. Saìga implies attachment. The
various exchanges, which take place in the course of one’s necessary dealings
with others, are not saìga. Saìga means to be attracted and attached to the
companionship of a particular person. Thus, the company of those persons who are
inimical to the Supreme Lord must be avoided strictly. Devotees embellished with
bhäva never feel the urge to associate with agnostics and atheists. However,
especially for the neophytes in vaidhé-bhakti such company is very dangerous.
Just as a dust storm or a heat wave can shrivel and dry up a creeper, similarly
the creeper of bhakti is destroyed in the company of non-believers.” 

Vijaya, “What persons are considered inimical to Kåñëa?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “There are the four types of inimical non-believers:
persons who have no devotion for Kåñëa; grossly materialistic persons overtly
attached to women and wine; persons whose hearts are poisoned by atheism and
impersonalistic mäyävädé thoughts; and persons who are engrossed in fruitive
activities. Their company has to be rejected.”

Vijaya, “How can a devotee curb the desire to get many disciples and followers,
as well as to initiate unworthy disciples, the twelfth limb?” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The insatiable greed for money drives some persons to
collect many disciples. This is a serious fault. Increasing the number of
disciples forces the person to initiate many unworthy and faithless candidates,
thus committing a huge offence. Only sincere persons with actual çraddhä are fit
to be initiated.”

Vijaya-kumara, “What is the meaning of ostentatiously displaying external pomp
and celebration, over-endeavouring to construct costly temples and monasteries,
the thirteenth limb?” 

Bäbäjé, “One should live simply and engage in devotional service to the Lord.
One should not become attached to great pomp, or to activities that require
unnecessary endeavour. Such endeavours will distract the heart of neophytes from
the worship of the Lord.”

Vijaya, “What is giving up accumulating many books, quoting from and analysing
extensively from non-devotional sources, the fourteenth limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The scriptures are a bottomless, shoreless expanse.
However, one should focus one’s studies upon those spiritual subjects that
interest one. Collect the relevant books and scrutinize them thoroughly. No one
can master a subject if he reads bits and scraps haphazardly from myriads of
literature. This is especially relevant in the study of bhakti. Undivided
attention when reading the bhakti literature can alone produce a comprehensive
grasp of sambandha, which is indispensable for one’s spiritual progress.
Furthermore, one should understand and explain the straight-forward, direct
meaning of a text—too much analysis and extrapolation only lead to
misconception.”

Vijaya, “What is meant by not being miserly, neglectful and capricious in
ordinary material dealings, the fifteenth item?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “To maintain the body, it is necessary to procure proper
food, shelter and clothing. If these things are not available, one suffers. In
addition, if one has acquired them and they are lost, one also suffers. When the
devotee has to endure such reversals, he must not succumb to despair and
anxiety, rather he should peacefully pray to the Supreme Lord and remember Him
with a steady heart.”

Vijaya, “How may one overcome the numbing grip of sorrow, frustration and
distress, the sixteenth limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “How can the mind dominated by lamentation, fear, anger,
greed, envy, etc., meditate upon Çré Kåñëa? A devotee may become afflicted by
lamentation and illusion because of the death of a family member, or because a
coveted desire remains unfulfilled, but he must not allow such feelings to
paralyse and cripple him. It is natural to mourn the demise of a son, but one
must quickly overcome such unhappiness by taking shelter of Çré Kåñëa and
praying to Him for solace and strength. In this way, a devotee must train
himself to always remember the lotus feet of the Lord in all conditions.” 

Vijaya, “The seventeenth limb is that one should not disrespect the devas and
devés. Does this imply that they should be worshiped?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The cultivation of single-minded devotion to Çré Kåñëa
is most essential for the devotee. One must not worship the devas considering
them as separate and independent of the supreme control of Çré Kåñëa. Yet, in
the presence of other persons worshiping the devas, the kåñëa-bhakta must not
denigrate the devas. Every deva must be regarded as an elevated devotee of Kåñëa
and an object of one’s reverence, but at the same time, one should remember that
only Çré Kåñëa is worthy of worship by all the devas. Thus, for the
kåñëa-bhakta, Çré Kåñëa is the prime goal of all worship and meditation, under
all conditions. 

“As long as unalloyed devotion has not blossomed, the heart and consciousness of
the conditioned jéva are not free from the influence of the material modes.
Moreover, only persons controlled by the three material modes would consider the
worship of devas as equivalent to the worship of Çré Kåñëa. Thus, the worship of
different devas may be recommended to those persons whose consciousness is
overpowered by the three material modes—a different deva according to their
individual preference, which is dictated according to the particular influence
of the material modes upon their consciousness. By these materially conditioned
preferences, they are only eligible to worship the devas. And, in their present
condition, such worship is certainly good for them, and thus they should develop
proper faith and endeavour in their particular worship. Therefore, a Kåñëa
devotee should not show the slightest disregard to the object of their worship.
By the mercy of the devas, these worshipers will eventually be purified of the
contamination caused by the infection of the material modes.”

Vijaya, “How may one stop being the cause of anxiety and disturbance to other
living beings, the eighteenth limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Çré Kåñëa is quickly pleased with persons who desist
from causing pain and anxiety to other living entities out of compassion for
them. Dayä, compassion, is the foremost Vaiñëava quality.”

Vijaya, “How can we stop committing sevä-aparädha and näma- aparädha, the
nineteenth limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Sevä-aparädha is connected to Deity worship, whereas
nämäparädha is related to çuddha-bhakti and spiritual life in general. Both
types of offence are to be shunned very carefully. There are thirty-two
sevä-aparädhas, beginning with riding a palanquin into the Lord’s temple and
wearing shoes in the Lord’s temple; and ten nämäparädhas, beginning with
blaspheming the devotees who have dedicated their lives to preaching the glories
of the Lord.”

Vijaya, “A devotee should not tolerate that Kåñëa or the Vaiñëavas are
criticized, the twentieth limb. Does this instruction imply that the devotee
must counter immediately?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Those who blaspheme Kåñëa and the Vaiñëavas are
non-believers and inimical to Kåñëa. This offensive attitude must not be
tolerated for any reason; the devotee has to renounce such company strictly.”

Vijaya, “Is there a particular connection between the first twenty limbs of
bhakti and the remaining forty-four limbs?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The latter forty-four limbs are contained within the
first twenty limbs. They are mentioned independently to highlight their
significance and to help one understand them better. The thirty limbs from the
twenty-first up to the fiftieth, inclusive, may be categorized under the banner
of arcanä-märga, the process of Deity worship. 

“The twenty-first limb is to place the Vaiñëava symbols upon the body. The
symbols consist of three strands of tulasé beads upon the neck and tilaka
markings on twelve places of the body. The twenty-second limb instructs the
devotee to write the names of the Supreme Lord or the names of the Païcatattva
upon the upper part of the body, or upon the forehead, with sandalwood paste or
tilaka.

“The twenty-third limb is referred to in the Çrémad Bhägavatam, 11.6.46:

tvayopabhukta-srag-gandha-
väso-’laìkära-carcitäù
ucchiñöa-bhojino däsäs
tava mäyäà jayema hi 

“‘Uddhava said, “My dear Kåñëa, simply by decorating ourselves with the
garlands, fragrant oils, clothes and ornaments that You have already enjoyed,
and by eating the remnants of Your meals, we, Your servants, will indeed conquer
Your illusory energy.’

“In this çloka of the Çrémad Bhägavatam, Çré Uddhava clearly explains the
efficacy of the remnants of the Lord.

“The next limbs of devotional service are as follows: The twenty-fourth, one
should learn to dance devotionally before the Deities of the Lord. The
twenty-fifth, upon seeing the Deity or spiritual master, one should prostrate
oneself immediately with great reverence. The twenty-sixth, one should stand up
and greet the Deities and one’s guru as a mark of respect, and the
twenty-seventh, one should follow in procession behind the Deity and guru. The
twenty-eight, one should regularly visit Çré Kåñëa’s temple and His dhämas. The
twenty-ninth, one should circumambulate the temple, Deity and dhämas, etc., the
prescribed number of times. The thirtieth, arcana, one should offer worship to
the Deity with the prescribed articles. These seven limbs from the twenty-fourth
up to the thirtieth inclusive are self-explanatory.

“The thirty-first limb, offering voluntary humble service to the Deity and the
Vaiñëavas, is best explained in the words of the following çloka from the
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, Pürva 2.61:

paricaryä tu sevopakaraëädi-pariñkriyä
tathä prakérëaka-cchatra-väditrädyair upäsanä 

“‘Any person who makes arrangements for serving the Lord in the same way as
attendants serve their king—with parasol, cämara, musical instruments and other
such paraphernalia—is surely elevated to the abode of Çré Kåñëa after death.’

“This çloka explains the meaning of humble attendance upon the Deity and
Vaiñëavas.

“The next fifteen limbs, the thirty-second to the forty-sixth inclusive, have
straight-forward, clear meanings. The thirty-second, one should sing devotional
bhajans and kértanas in glorification of the Lord for His pleasure. The
thirty-third, one should participate in saìkértana with one’s fellow devotees.
The thirty-fourth, one should practice japa meditation, i.e. chanting
näma-mantra very softly, only for one’s own hearing whilst counting upon one’s
beads or fingers. The thirty-fifth, one should offer prayers with great feelings
of humility and meekness, thus offering one’s very self in complete submission
to the Lord. The thirty-sixth, with devotion one should recite authorised,
notable and choice prayers from the devotional scriptures such as the
Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad Bhägavatam. The thirty-seventh, one should honour and
relish kåñëa-prasädam. The thirty-eight, one should drink caraëämåta, the water
used to bathe the Deity. The thirty-ninth, one should smell the incense, oils,
flowers, etc., previously offered to the Lord. The fortieth, one should touch
the lotus feet of the Deity—this limb is for those devotees who have been
properly initiated. The forty-first, one should present oneself before and thus
take the darçana of the Deity. The forty-second, one should joyfully participate
in the äraté and other celebrations of the Deity. The forty-third, one should
attentively hear about the name, beauty, qualities and unlimited pastimes of the
Lord. The forty-fourth, one should wait patiently for the Lord to shower His
mercy, whilst regularly pursuing one’s devotional practice. The forty-fifth, one
should practice contemplation of the name, form, qualities and pastimes of the
Lord. The forty-sixth, one should practice meditation upon the service, name,
form, qualities and pastimes of the Lord, including rendering manasi-sevä,
service within the mind. 

“The forty-seventh limb, däsya, devotional service in servitude, is of two
kinds: karmäpan, offering the results of one’s fruitive activities; and
kaiìkarya, to be constantly engaged in the service of the Deity with body, mind
and words. The forty-eight limb, sakhya, devotional service in friendship, is of
two moods: viçväsa, as a confidential servant; and mitra-våtti, as a
well-wishing friend. The forty-ninth limb, ätma-nivedana indicates the
devotional mood of complete self-surrender. Ätmä specifies the ‘self’, but not
just the jéva soul, but ätmä also indicates both deha-niñöha ahamta, the concept
that ‘I am this material body’, and deha-niñöha mamatä, the concept that ‘this
body and its possessions are mine’. These two concepts one should nivedana,
surrender, to the lotus feet of the Çré Kåñëa.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, kindly explain more about deha-niñöha ahamta, ‘I am this
body’; and deha-niñöha mamatä, ‘this body and its possessions are mine’.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The occupier of deha, the material body, is called
dehé. He is the jéva indicated by aham, I, which is the sense of self—the ego.
When the jéva incorrectly identifies his self as being the material body, this
is known as deha-niñöha ahamta. This then leads to the second illusory concept
under which the material body and everything related to the material body are
claimed as one’s own rightful possessions. This illusory concept is known as
deha-niñöha mamatä. The self, the material body and its possessions must be
purified by being offered to Çré Kåñëa. One should give up the false material
identity and illusory concepts of, ‘I’ and ‘Mine’. Thus, in devotional life one
should assert oneself with the real ‘I’, the identity of being the servant of
Çré Kåñëa, subsisting on kåñëa-prasädam. In addition, one’s body, mind, words,
and possessions are to be surrendered to Çré Kåñëa to be utilized as instruments
for His service, thus purifying oneself of the illusory concept of ‘Mine’. A
devotee whose consciousness is thus immersed is on the platform of
ätma-nivedana.”

Vijaya, “How shall we offer Kåñëa our most exquisite and favourite objects, the
fiftieth limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “In this world whatever special object that has
attracted our attention and attachment should be offered to Çré Kåñëa and
considered as His own property. This is known as offering a favourite article to
the Lord.”

Vijaya, “How does a person make a whole-hearted endeavour for Kåñëa, the
fifty-first limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Whether the Vedic or ordinary duties of this material
world, one’s activities should be performed in the manner that is favourable for
Kåñëa consciousness. In this way, the activities satisfy Çré Kåñëa and are known
as making all endeavours, even taking risks, for the sake of Çré Kåñëa.” 

Vijaya, “What is the meaning of in every condition one should be a surrendered
soul, the fifty-second limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “When one is absorbed in the thoughts, ‘O Lord, I am
Yours in all respects,’ and ‘O Lord, I surrender myself unto You completely,’
this attitude of resignation is called being a surrendered soul.”

Vijaya, “How is Tulasé devé to be served, the fifty-third limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Tulasé devé may be served in nine ways: seeing Tulasé,
touching Tulasé, meditating upon Tulasé, glorifying Tulasé, bowing down before
Tulasé, hearing the glorification of Tulasé, planting Tulasé, tasting Tulasé,
and worshiping Tulasé daily. All these services to Tulasé devé are ultimately
meant for the pleasure of the Supreme Lord, thus the glories of Tulasé devé are
endless.”

Vijaya, “How can the scriptures be given proper respect, the fifty-four limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Texts which determine, analyse and establish pure
devotion to the Supreme Lord are çästra. Amongst the many çästras, the Çrémad
Bhägavatam is the foremost since it is the refined essence of the Vedänta. Those
elevated saints who are steeped in the immortal ambrosia of the Bhägavata
Puräëa, i.e. the Çrémad Bhägavatam, are not attracted to any other scriptures.”

Vijaya, “How should Mathurä, the birth-place of Çré Kåñëa, be glorified, the
fifty-fifth limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Hear, remember, glorify the transcendental qualities of
Mathurä, have a desire to visit Mathurä on pilgrimage, smear one’s body with the
dust of Mathurä, reside in Mathurä, and serve the sacred land. All these
activities fulfil one’s most coveted wishes. Equally significant spiritually is
Çré Mäyäpura-dhäma.”

Vijaya, “What does it mean to serve the Vaiñëavas, the fifty-sixth limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Vaiñëavas are very dear to Çré Kåñëa. By serving
them, a person attains bhakti to the Supreme Lord. The çästras declare that the
worship of Çré Viñëu is supreme amongst all varieties of worship, but even
higher than the worship of Çré Viñëu is the worship of the servants of Viñëu,
the Vaiñëavas.”

Vijaya, “How does one perform ceremonies in glorification of the Lord according
to one’s financial position, the fifty-seventh limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Purchase ingredients for offerings to the Lord
according to one’s means. After worshiping the Lord and offering Him delicacies,
His pure devotees, the saintly Vaiñëavas, must be served prasädam to their full
satisfaction. This is known as mahotsava, a grand celebration. It is the best
form of celebration in the world.” 

Vijaya, “How should one honour the month of Kärttika, the fifty-eighth limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Another name for Kärttika is Ürja. The devotees take
special vows of renunciation and increase their devotional activities of
hearing, chanting, remembering, circumambulation, etc., to celebrate the
pastimes of Çré Dämodara, Çré Kåñëa. This practice is also known as Ürjadara,
worship in the month of Kärttika.”

Vijaya, “How should the appearance days of the Lord be celebrated, the
fifty-ninth limb?” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “For the surrendered devotees, the Supreme Lord’s
appearance days—such as Kåñëa-janmäñöamé, the eight day of the dark fortnight in
the month of Bhädra, and Gaura-pürëimä, the full moon day in the month of
Phälguna—are very special and spiritually significant. They are carefully
celebrated with spiritual sobriety and devotional fervour by those who are
dedicated and are also known as Çré Janma-yäträ.”

Vijaya, “How should the Deities be served and worshiped with proper faith, the
sixtieth limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “When performing Deity worship service the devotee must
always remain enthusiastic and maintain a loving attitude towards the Lord. A
sincere soul is not bestowed the pathetic and worthless gift of impersonal
liberation through Deity worship, but is rewarded with the priceless
transcendental gem of bhakti by the Supreme Lord.”

Vijaya, “Mahäräja, kindly explain how we can relish the nectar of the Çrémad
Bhägavatam in the exalted company of those rasika devotees who are forever
steeped within its divine rasa, the sixty-first limb?” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Vedas are a wish-fulfilling desire tree and the
Çrémad Bhägavatam is the deliciously ripened fruit of this desire tree. To
savour this nectar is impossible in the company of those who do not have any
actual taste for it. In fact, one becomes an offender, if one tries to do so.
The sincere aspirant must find a pure devotee—one who is imbued with rasa and
thirsty for hearing Kåñëa’s sublime pastimes—and in his association relish the
succulent sweetness of the Çrémad Bhägavatam. In non-devotional assemblies and
mundane social gatherings, a discussion upon and reading from the Çrémad
Bhägavatam will have a negative, or at best no effect, upon spiritual progress.”


Vijaya, “What is meant by associating with devotees who are peaceful, elevated,
and have similar spiritual sentiments to oneself, the sixty-second limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “One cannot advance spiritually if one associates with
non-devotees, even if one rubber-stamps them as devotees. A sincere devotee
always desires to enter and engage in the transcendental service of the eternal,
supramundane pastimes of Çré Kåñëa. This is the hallmark of a true bhakta,
devotee. Amongst the bhaktas, those who are more elevated than oneself should be
sought out, because association with them enhances one’s own quality of bhakti.
Otherwise, the growth of bhakti will be arrested and one will be gradually
dragged down to the same level of the persons with whom one is associating. We
are warned against this danger in the Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya, 8.51:

yasya yat-saìgatiù puàso maëivat syät sa tad-guëaù
sva-kularddhye tato dhémän sva-yuthäny eva saàçrayet

“‘A person gradually acquires the characteristics of the company he keeps, much
like a gem stone which lends some of its own colour and sparkle to other
substances in touch with it. Therefore, a person can become a pure devotee in
the saintly association of devotees.’”

Vijaya, “How is näma-kértana defined, the sixty-third limb?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Näma is a transcendental, spiritual entity without the
slightest trace of materialism. Näma voluntarily appears upon the tongue of the
enthusiastic devotee whose senses have been purified by devotion. Certainly näma
is not perceivable by materially polluted senses. With the wholehearted
devotional attitude, a devotee should chant harinäma, individually and
congregationally.”

Vijaya, “Çréla Gurudeva, by your mercy, we have already understood the purport
of residing in Mathurä, the birth-place of Çré Kåñëa, or a place where Çré Kåñëa
reveals his pastimes, only for the purpose of kåñëa-bhakti, the sixty-four limb.
Now we would like to know the essence of all these sixty-four limbs of bhakti
that you have so kindly explained.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The last five of the sixty-four limbs we have just
discussed constitute the topmost activities of bhakti. If any devotee can even
sparingly perform these activities without offence, he is very quickly elevated
to the platform of bhäva-bhakti upon the strength of their spiritual potency.”

Vijaya, “Revered Gurujé, kindly instruct us in whatever more we should know
about sädhana-bhakti.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The devotional limbs described here offer certain
superfluous, subsidiary, non-devotional results that are mentioned in the
scriptures, but in principle those results are propounded only to attract and
motivate the worldly-minded to engage in bhakti. By contact with the
transcendental purity of bhakti the materialistic predilection of the
worldly-minded will be gradually transformed into the real and primary
consequence of bhakti—attachment to the lotus feet of Çré Kåñëa. The serious
students and knowledgeable exponents of çuddha-bhakti feel that the eternal
devotional results should be the goal, whilst the transient fruitive aspects are
disposable.

“A person obtains some degree of eligibility to tread the path of bhakti because
of his jïäna, knowledge, and vairägya, renunciation, but it cannot be taken for
granted that this jïäna and vairägya will be transformed into actual practice of
the limbs of çuddha-bhakti. Jïäna and vairägya tend to steel and dry up the
heart, whereas the effect of bhakti is soft and smooth, and thus melts the
heart. However, jïäna and vairägya resulting from the practice of bhakti are
unquestionably accepted as a part of çuddha-bhakti. 

“On their own, jïäna and vairägya are inadequate to crown anyone with the
delicious fruit of çuddha-bhakti—they can never be the cause of çuddha-bhakti.
Moreover, what they fail to offer is given easily by bhakti. By properly
executing çuddha-bhakti, a unique taste for serving and worshiping Çré Kåñëa is
generated to such an extent that even the strongest material attachments are
completely dissipated. 

“The sädhaka must carefully practise yukta-vairägya, and simultaneously avoid
phalgu-vairägya, false, dry renunciation. All suitable material objects may be
utilized in the service of Çré Kåñëa, simply because they belong to Him.
However, at the same time, one must be without mundane attachment for these
material objects. Handling matter in such a balanced way is known as
yukta-vairägya. Everything is a part of Çré Kåñëa and has a connection to Him.
Simply renouncing matter because it is supposedly non-spiritual and mundane,
whilst stoking the burning desire for monistic liberation—this is called
phalgu-vairägya. Therefore, mundane knowledge and false renunciation pursued
without relationship with Çré Kåñëa must be discarded.

“The false public exhibition of the ecstatic symptoms of bhakti by materialistic
pseudo-devotees with ulterior motives for the accumulation of wealth, followers
and disciples is far, far removed from çuddha-bhakti and is certainly not a limb
of bhakti. Virtuous character and qualities such as viveka, intelligent
discrimination, are an embellishment for those entering and practicing the path
of bhakti, but should not be considered to be the necessary qualifications to
engage in bhakti. 

“Devotees practising bhakti are often graced by qualities such as sense control,
discipline, cleanliness, etc., which appear naturally and without special
effort. Nevertheless, they are not limbs of bhakti. These characteristics and
more, such as internal and external purity, austerity, equipoise, and so on,
automatically blossom in the personality of a devotee of Kåñëa. He does not have
to make a separate effort to cultivate them. Any person who sincerely endeavours
to practise any one or more of the principle limbs of bhakti, as just explained,
will definitely attain perfection in spiritual life, Kåñëa consciousness. 

“I have thus narrated everything about vaidhé-sädhana-bhakti in a nutshell. You
may try to implement these instructions to the best of your ability.”

Vrajanätha and Vijaya-kumära prostrated themselves before the lotus feet of Çré
Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé Mahäräja, and said humbly, “O Gurudeva! Please be
merciful upon us and save us from the deep well of false pride in which we are
drowning.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé replied, “Çré Kåñëa will certainly bestow His blessings
upon you.” 

Through the reassuring silence of the late night, uncle and nephew returned
home, their hearts humming with elation and their minds meditating upon the
teachings they had just received from Çré Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé Mahäräja.

Thus ends the twentieth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma:
Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana, Part Eight: Abhidheya: Vaidhé Sädhana
Bhakti, the Practice of Regulative Devotional Service

JDH 21: Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Chapter Twenty-one
Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Part Nine: Abhidheya: Rägänuga-sädhana-bhakti, the Cultivation of Spontaneous
Devotional Service

Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha felt that the instructions of Çré Raghunätha däsa
Bäbäjé Mahäräja radiated a sublime calm, which soothed away any doubts from
their minds. They therefore arrived at a joint decision to immediately take
initiation from him. Vijaya-kumära had received traditional initiation from his
family priest and Vrajanätha had already received gäyatré dékñä, initiation into
the gäyatré mantra, but no other mantra-dékñä. They had learned from Raghunätha
däsa Bäbäjé that if one receives and chants a mantra from a non-Vaiñëava, one is
on the sure path to Hell, and that upon understanding this mistake one must
immediately receive initiation from a Vaiñëava guru. Moreover, to attain swift
perfection in one’s chanting, it is indispensable that the dékñä-guru be a
transcendental self-realized soul.

So, early the next morning, they set off for Çréväsäìgana, determined to take
initiation from Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé that very morning. After sanctifying
themselves in the holy waters of the Gaìgä and decorating their bodies with
tilaka upon the twelve places with the appropriate mantras, they arrived at
Mäyäpura Çréväsäìgana, where they prostrated themselves before Çré Raghunätha
däsa Bäbäjé, a self-realized and liberated soul. Though he had intuited their
intention, he nevertheless asked, “What brings you here, so early this morning?”

They replied, “O revered Gurudeva, we are helpless and spiritually destitute,
please be so kind as to take us under your shelter!”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé then invited them to come into his hut, one after the
other, where he initiated them with the eighteen-syllable kåñëa-mantra. Upon
beginning to chant this potent mantra, they became intoxicated and exultant,
exclaiming aloud, “All glories to Çré Gauräìga! All glories to Çré Gauräìga!”
Raising their arms, they began to dance with graceful postures. They looked
sublime with tulasé beads around their necks, white sacred threads hanging
loosely diametrically across the chest from the left shoulder, prominent tilaka
marks shining on the twelve places of their bodies, and their bright faces
flushed with spiritual emotion. The initial stirrings of ecstatic symptoms were
obvious as unrestrained tears flowed from their eyes.

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé was much moved and embraced each of them, saying, “Today
you have sanctified me.” Vrajanätha and Vijaya-kumära fell at his feet and
smeared their heads and bodies with the dust of his feet. Meanwhile, two
servants of Vrajanätha arrived at Çréväsäìgana loaded with foodstuffs. Before
Vrajanätha had set off for Mäyäpura that morning, he had arranged for a large
amount of food supplies to be brought for offering to Çré Mahäprabhu and the
Vaiñëavas. Humbly approaching the other nearby Vaiñëavas with folded hands,
Vrajanätha and Vijaya-kumära humbly requested them to accept the bhoga for
offering to the Lord. The head-priest of the Çréväsäìgana temple received the
bhoga graciously, sending it to the kitchen to be cooked and offered to the
Païcatattva Deities upon the temple altar.

A while later, the bhoga-äraté ceremony was performed with conchshells sounding
and bells ringing aloud. The Vaiñëavas had assembled in the temple room in front
of the Païcatattva Deities and now raised their voices in melodious harmony,
singing the special song for the äraté, accompanied by mådaìga drums and hand
cymbals. A gradually increasing number of Vaiñëavas expressed their exhilaration
in a sweet chorus of praise for Çré Caitanya. Finally, the äraté worship ended
in a jubilant crescendo. 

As was usual for celebrations, the temple room was cleared to serve as a
prasädam hall for the large gathering. The Vaiñëavas sat in rows, each with a
simple loöä vessel for water, whilst thanksgiving prayers for the prasädam were
loudly chanted to the Lord. Vrajanätha and Vijaya because of their great respect
at first refused to sit with the Vaiñëavas. However, upon seeing this the senior
Bäbäjés had them practically carried to their seats in the assembly.

One of the elder Bäbäjés said, “You are householder Vaiñëavas, it will be our
great fortune to offer daëòavats to you.” 

However Vrajanätha and Vijaya-kumära replied, “Respected Bäbäjé, you are a holy
preceptor, renounced and advanced—we will consider it a blessing, if we are
allowed to partake of your sacred remnants. To sit and eat with you would be a
serious offence.” 

Other elder Vaiñëavas replied, “When one assesses an advanced Vaiñëava, the
social status of being either a gåhastha-vaiñëava, or a tyägé-vaiñëava is not
the criterion. A Vaiñëava is judged by the depth of his devotion and accordingly
he is respected.”

During this discussion, the preparations for serving had been completed and all
had taken seats at their respective places. However, Vrajanätha and
Vijaya-kumära still would not take because they wanted to wait and then relish
the remnants from the plate of their guru. Observing this, the elder Vaiñëavas
requested Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, who was the most respected amongst them, to
kindly offer a morsel from his plate to his two waiting disciples, otherwise
they would not honour the prasädam. Thus, Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé dropped a
handful of prasädam from his plate into their outstretched palms. Touching the
prasädam to their foreheads in a gesture of reverence, they chanted, “Çré-guruve
namaù,” and then savoured the prasädam in the knowledge that it was purely
transcendental foodstuff. They then joined the other Vaiñëavas in joyfully
relishing the prasädam.

The Vaiñëavas honoured the prasädam in quiet meditation, the silence being
interrupted at intervals by salutary words glorifying the prasädam. Çréväsäìgana
had once more become the location of a marvellous festival. Remembering a verse
from Jagadänanda Paëòita’s book Prema-vivarta that aptly described their present
experience, the devotees visualized Çrématé Çacédevé, Çrématé Sétädevé and
Çrématé Mälinédevé serving prasädam to Çré Caitanya surrounded by His
associates:

mäyäpura nitya-lélä kare gaura-räya
sukåtira bale bhakta dekhibäre päya 

“Çré Caitanya eternally enacts His transcendental pastimes in the holy dhäma of
Mäyäpura, but only those who—by dint of their innumerable pious deeds—have a
pure heart are able to see them.”

Then, all at once, the Vaiñëavas stopped eating and sat in absolute silence,
becoming spellbound as the Lord directly manifested this pastime before their
eyes. The wonderstruck assembly saw Çré Caitanya and His associates seated
together whilst being served great varieties of prasädam by Çacédevé, Sétädevé
and Mälinédevé. Yet, the scene disappeared as suddenly as it had appeared,
leaving the devotees looking at each other in complete astonishment. As the
realization of what they had just witnessed dawned, tears of ecstasy brimmed in
their eyes. The prasädam now tasted relishable beyond words. The Vaiñëavas
softly said to one another that these two brähmaëa youths were definitely the
recipients of Çré Caitanya’s special mercy for the Supreme Lord, Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, had manifested His eternal pastimes at this mahotsava arranged by
them. Nonetheless, Vrajanätha and Vijaya-kumära felt unfit to accept such
praise. Tears were streaming from their eyes when they said, “We are wretched
and indigent, ignorant about spiritual life. The wonderful scene we were allowed
to witness was solely because of the mercy of our Gurudeva and the saintly
Vaiñëavas present.” After finishing prasädam, Vrajanätha and Vijaya-kumära
begged permission from their guru and the Vaiñëavas to leave and return to their
residence. 

From that day on, Vrajanätha and Vijaya started a new daily routine. They took
an early morning dip in the Gaìgä, offered obeisances to the lotus feet of Çréla
Gurudeva, saw the Deities in the temple, circumambulated them, offered worship
and water to Tulasé devé, and so forth. They made an effort to learn and
practice a new devotional observance every day to help them make swift spiritual
progress. 

A week later, they visited Çréväsäìgana in the evening, after completing their
daily brahminical duties of gäyatré-mantra, japa, etc. After attending the
evening äraté in the temple, they went to see their Gurudeva in his
bhajana-kuöéra. Offering obeisances, they sat down and asked, “Dear Gurujé, by
your blessings, we have a clear concept of vaidhé-bhakti-sädhana. Although we
are most degraded, our earnest desire is that you kindly explain to us the
precepts of rägänuga-bhakti.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé was overjoyed at this request and said, “My sons, our
beloved Lord, Çré Caitanya, has endorsed your initiation, hence there is nothing
that cannot be revealed to you. Listen very carefully as I explain the
principles of rägänuga-bhakti. I shall begin my dissertation by first offering
repeated respects to the lotus feet of Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé who was saved from the
crippling association of the yavanas by our dear Lord, Çré Caitanya, who then
enlightened him with the wisdom of rasa-tattva, the truth about transcendental
mellows. I also offer my deepest devotion to Çréla Raghunäthadäsa Gosvämé, who
was also delivered by the most munificent personality, Çré Caitanya. The Lord
extricated him from the entanglement of temporal attachments and placed him
under the safe spiritual protection of Çréla Svarüpa Gosvämé, thus rewarding him
with entire perfection. As a preamble to the subject of rägänuga-bhakti, I want
to delineate the symptoms of rägätmikä-bhakti, the spontaneous transcendental
loving service of the nitya-siddhas, the eternal residents of the spiritual
realm.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, before we proceed further, kindly explain to us the
meaning of the word räga.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “In the course of daily interactions with the phenomenal
world, the conditioned soul develops strong love and attraction for the material
world; this sensual attraction is known as viñaya-räga. As the eyes restlessly
pass from one beautiful material object to another, this external variegatedness
keeps the viewer enthralled by its riotous hues; simultaneously, his inner heart
feels the caress of mundane räga, attraction. However, when räga has made Çré
Kåñëa the sole objective, this consciousness is called räga-bhakti.”

“Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé defines räga in the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu 1.2.272:

iñöe svärasiké rägaù
 paramäviñöatä bhavet
tan-mayé yä bhaved bhaktiù
 sätra rägätmikoditä

“‘Räga is total absorption in one’s most worshipable object, tempered with
emotions that are svä-rasiké, i.e., in accordance with one’s innate mood of
transcendental love. When devotion to Çré Kåñëa is fully complemented by räga,
it is described as rägätmikä-bhakti.’ 

“To put it briefly, rägätmikä-bhakti is the insatiable thirst to love Çré Kåñëa.
Those devotees who have not yet experienced spiritual emotions in this realm of
rägamayé-bhakti, devotion imbued with räga, must seek the dictates of the
scriptures to enhance their devotion, thus following vaidhé-sädhana-bhakti. Awe,
reverence and faith are the active principles of vaidhé-bhakti, whilst an
ever-increasing spiritual greed to relish the pastimes of Çré Kåñëa is the
hallmark of rägätmikä-bhakti.”

Vrajanätha, “Who can be considered a fit candidate for rägamayé-bhakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “It is said that vaidhé-çraddhä, implicit faith in
scriptural injunctions, creates eligibility for the practice of vaidhé-bhakti.
Similarly, lobhamayi-çraddhä—implicit faith in Çré Kåñëa, driven by lobha,
intense spiritual greed—gives one the eligibility to enter the realm of
rägamayé-bhakti. The vrajaväsés, eternal residents of the highest spiritual
realm, are immersed in various spiritual mellows that are full of räga. The
devotees who are keen to obtain the bhäva, ecstatic emotion, that the vrajaväsés
possess for Çré Kåñëa, are eligible to enter into rägänuga-bhakti, i.e. bhakti
that takes shelter of and follows the räga and bhäva of the eternal residents of
the spiritual realm.”

Vrajanätha, “In this context what are the defining symptoms of lobha?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “When one hears about the loving devotional sentiments
and the intimate dealings of the vrajaväsés with their beloved Çré Kåñëa and
this awakens the desire to fully participate in those pastimes, this is called
lobha. When the vaidhé-bhakti practitioner listens to the pastimes of Çré Kåñëa,
he looks for guidance from the fundamental scriptural instructions and uses a
rationalistic approach to comprehend these pastimes, but in rägänuga-bhakti the
intellect does not need scriptures or logic, for it is fully surcharged with
lobha to possess the bhäva of the vrajaväsés.”

Vrajanätha, “What is the process of rägänuga-bhakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The sädhaka, devotee in the stage of sädhana, must
always remember and follow in the footsteps of an eternal associate of the Lord,
a vrajaväsé, in whose eternal service to Çré Kåñëa he finds a deep attraction.
Thus, the sädhaka has developed lobha to attain a position of service similar to
that of his chosen vrajaväsé. The sädhaka will reside in Vraja, either in
person, or in spirit, and contemplate upon the loving exchanges and
conversations of that vrajaväsé with the beloved Çré Kåñëa. Developing an
increasing, intense greed to acquire a similar bhäva, he assiduously emulates
the vrajaväsé of his choice and renders two varieties of devotional service
under his or her constant guidance. Externally, he serves the Lord as a sädhaka,
and internally, he assumes his spiritual form—the siddha-deha which will
permanently manifest one day—and serves the Lord in that capacity.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the parallels between rägänuga-bhakti and the limbs of
vaidhé-bhakti?” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “All the vaidhé-bhakti limbs like çravaëaà, kértanaà,
etc., are very much present in the devotional activities of a rägänuga-sädhaka.
While the sädhaka is savouring the eternal service of Çré Kåñëa within himself
under the guidance of his chosen vrajaväsé, externally the limbs of
vaidhé-bhakti-sädhana are being simultaneously performed.” 

Vrajanätha, “What is the superiority of bhakti based upon räga to bhakti based
upon vaidhé?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Practice of vaidhé-bhakti for a long time, even with
the utmost sincerity, is hardly able to produce the results that are gained with
far less endeavour by rägänuga-bhakti. Vaidhé-bhakti is hedged in by a great
number of çästric prohibitions and prescriptions that make it weak, whereas
rägänuga-bhakti is independent and based upon natural attraction, making it firm
and sturdy. The rägänuga-sädhaka, an aspiring servant of a vrajaväsé, stimulates
increasing räga by internally following in the footsteps of his chosen vrajaväsé
and by his simultaneous application of the nine processes of çravaëaà, kértanaà,
etc., and all the other suitable limbs of bhakti with his external body.

“When the consciousness has been cleansed of the contamination of the material
modes—goodness, passion, and ignorance—one naturally feels an increasing
inspiration to follow a particular eternal associate of the Lord. Thus, the
lobha and ruci for rägänuga-bhakti actually inspire one to follow the path of
one’s true nitya-dharma. Rägänuga-bhakti and rägätmikä-bhakti have the same
number of divisions.”

Vrajanätha, “How many divisions of rägätmikä-bhakti are there?” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “There are two kinds of rägätmikä-bhakti: käma-rüpa,
devotion born from desire, and sambandha-rüpa, devotion born of kinship.” 

Vrajanätha, “Kindly explain the distinctions between these two forms of
devotion?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Çrémad Bhägavatam, 7.1.30-31, states:

kämäd dveñäd bhayät snehäd
yathä bhaktyeçvare manaù
äveçya tad-aghaà hitvä
bahavas tad-gatià gatäù

“‘Many, many persons have attained liberation simply by thinking of Kåñëa with
great attention and giving up sinful activities. This great attention may be
because of lusty desires, inimical feelings, fear, affection, or devotional
service. I shall now explain how one receives Kåñëa’s mercy simply by
concentrating one’s mind upon Him.’

gopyaù kämäd bhayät kaàso
dveñäc caidyädayo nåpäù
sambandhäd våñëayaù snehäd
yüyaà bhaktyä vayaà vibho

“‘My dear King Yudhiñöhira, the gopés by their lusty desires, Kaàsa by his fear,
Çiçupäla and other kings by envy, the Yadus by their familial relationship with
Kåñëa, you Päëòavas by your great affection for Kåñëa, and we, the general
devotees, by our devotional service, have obtained the mercy of Kåñëa.’

“In this çloka, six relationships with Çré Kåñëa are mentioned: käma, lust;
bhaya, fear; dveña, envy; sambandha, family ties; sneha, affection; and bhakti,
devotion. Amongst these, bhaya and dveña, being unfavourable feelings of the
mind, are unsuitable for prema-bhakti; therefore, they are rejected by devotees
of the Lord and have no part in rägamayé-bhakti. 

“The sneha mentioned in the above çloka indicates the favourable feeling of
friendly affection towards the Lord. Accordingly, it is to be placed within
vaidhé-sädhana-bhakti and is also not part of rägamayé-bhakti. In other purely
transcendental relationships, the word sneha indicates affection laced with the
loving sentiments of prema-bhäva and is therefore not a part of
rägänugä-sädhana-bhakti, for that level of spiritual love belongs to
accomplished prema-bhakti. 

“Further, Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé explains in Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, Pürva 2.135,
that vaidhé-bhakti is indicated by the words of the above çloka …bhaktyä vayaà
vibhu…‘We through bhakti have attained the supreme goal.’ Thus, this çloka
explains that the general devotees have attained the supreme goal of devotional
service to the Supreme Lord by vaidhé-bhakti. Therefore, the category of bhakti
indicated by the above words …bhaktyä vayaà vibhu… is also not rägamayé-bhakti.

“In other situations, the word bhakti mentioned in the above çloka may be
interpreted to indicate jïäna-miçra-bhakti, i.e. bhakti mixed with jïäna, thus
indicating a strong affinity for scriptural knowledge and a tendency for
monistic liberation on the part of the sädhaka. Hence, this also cannot be taken
as part of rägamayé-bhakti. The jïänés, following their monistic bent of mind,
will interpret the words …tad-gatià gatäù… ‘We have attained the supreme goal,’
as meaning that one has merged oneself into the brahma-jyotir and thereby
equalised oneself with Brahman, the bodily effulgence of Çré Kåñëa. They use the
argument that the sun and its rays are the same. Yet, they should note that the
enemies of Çré Kåñëa also merge into the brahma-jyotir. Amongst these souls
liberated by merging into the effulgence of the Lord, some may attain
särüpya-äbhäsa-mukti, i.e. having a semblance of the same form as the Lord,
whereas, other souls may become steeped in the monistic bliss of Brahman.
According to the Brahmäëòa Puräëa, they have been elevated to siddha-loka, which
is situated on the periphery of the mäyä-jagat, the illusory world.

“In principle, there is no difference between Çré Kåñëa and His physical lustre,
the Brahman, just as the sun and its rays are the same. Therefore, in the above
çloka the word tad-gatià means to attain Kåñëa—whether it be the jïänés and
asuras being elevated to säyujya liberation, or alternatively the blessed
devotees finding eternal engagement in the service of Çré Kåñëa’s lotus feet.

“Therefore, from this analysis, we see that four moods—bhaya, fear; dveña, envy;
sneha, affection; and bhakti, indicating either vaidhé-bhakti or
jïäna-miçra-bhakti—are to be subtracted from the six moods mentioned in the
above çloka; thereby, leaving only two—käma, spiritual lust, and sambandha,
kinship, as self-assertive, transcendentally independent of scriptural
regulation and applicable to räga-märga, the path of loving transcendental
attraction. Thus, käma and sambandha are the two types of rägamayé-bhakti.”

Vrajanätha, “What is the nature of käma-rüpa bhakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The word käma may imply the thirst to enjoy selfishly
and materially. However, when this mood manifests in rägätmikä-bhakti, it is
actually causeless, transcendental love for Kåñëa, completely free from the
material pollution of selfishness. Transcendental käma is selfless love, wherein
every single endeavour of the lover, the devotee, is directed to satisfy the
beloved, Çré Kåñëa. All activities for self-aggrandizement and
self-gratification are absent. Even if there are elements of desire for personal
happiness, these are ultimately employed for Kåñëa’s pleasure. 

“This super-excellent love is perfectly portrayed in the gopés of Vraja, the
cowherd girl friends of Çré Kåñëa. The sublime love of the vraja-gopés takes on
a magnificent sweetness that initiates befitting pastimes. The saintly
preceptors have defined this love by the word käma. Nevertheless, the love of
the vraja-gopés is truly transcendental, pristine and untouched by mundane
contamination. It can never be compared with the lust of the embodied materially
conditioned living entities, which is self-centred, motivated and gross. This
brilliant love of the vraja-gopés is so lofty that it inspires the purest and
most spiritually evolved devotees of Kåñëa—like Uddhava—to aspire after it. The
käma of the vraja-gopés has no parallels anywhere. It is the superlative and
absolute pinnacle of divine love. 

“Käma-rüpa bhakti thrives only in Vraja and not elsewhere. The desire exhibited
by Kubjä in Mathurä towards Kåñëa is indeed love, but not the pure käma of
transcendence. At best, it is almost käma, known as käma-präya, and is distinct
from the käma of the nitya-siddha gopés as just described.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the characteristics of sambandha-rüpa bhakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Sambandha-rüpa bhakti springs from the mood, ‘I am
Kåñëa’s father’, or ‘I am Kåñëa’s mother’, or another familial relationship with
Kåñëa. In the Våñëi dynasty, Kåñëa’s parents—Devaké and Vasudeva, and
others—display this familial sentiment. However, the original manifestation of
this mood is in Vraja, as exhibited by Yaçodä and Nanda and others of that
mellow in Vraja. 

“One should understand that rägätmikä-bhakti is the exclusive domain of the
nitya-siddhas of Vraja and that their unalloyed transcendental love finds its
natural expression in käma-rüpa bhakti and sambandha-rüpa bhakti. When talking
about rägätmikä-bhakti, it is essential to understand these two varieties. Now
let us turn to kämänuga-bhakti and sambandhänuga-bhakti, the two types of
rägänuga sädhana-bhakti that follow in the footsteps of these two varieties of
rägätmikä-bhakti.”

Vrajanätha, “Mahäräja, kindly elaborate on these two forms of rägänuga
sädhana-bhakti.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Kämänuga is a form of spiritual aspiration that follows
in the footsteps of käma-rüpa rägätmikä-bhakti and is also of two varieties:
sambhogecchämayé and tat-tad bhavecchä-mayé.” 

Vrajanätha, “What is sambhogecchämayé?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Sambhogecchämayé is the desire to enter the
transcendental amorous pastimes of the vraja-gopés with Kåñëa and satisfy Kåñëa
therein. These pastimes are supramundane and are defined as sambhoga, pleasure.
The desire to enter such pleasurable dealings is sambhogecchämayé.”

Vrajanätha, “What is tat-tad bhavecchä-mayé?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Tat-tad bhavecchä-mayé is the desire to develop
profound transcendental love, full of sweetness and amorous feelings for Çré
Kåñëa, in emulation of the vraja-yütheçvärés, the different female group-leaders
of the innumerable vraja-gopés.” 

Vrajanätha, “How are these two types of rägänuga-sädhana bhakti, i.e. kämänuga
and sambandhänuga, ignited within the heart?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “By seeing the beautiful Deity form of Çré Kåñëa and by
hearing of His glorious pastimes, a devotee experiences the desire to experience
the bhävas intrinsic to these pastimes. With great good fortune, he then embarks
upon practising either kämänuga rägänuga-bhakti or sambandhänuga
rägänuga-bhakti.”

Vrajanätha, “Çré Kåñëa is the puruña, the male entity, and the vraja-gopés are
all prakåti, female entities. Therefore, it seems that only women are eligible
to participate in this mood of kämänuga rägänuga-bhakti. How can males develop
such bhäva?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Though residing now in this material world, the living
entities have five different spiritual mellows according to their tendency.
Amongst these, four—däsya, servitorship; sakhya, friendship; vätsalya, parental
love; and mädhurya, conjugal love—are found in the vrajaväsés. Of this four,
there are three mellows wherein devotees serve Kåñëa in a male form—däsya,
sakhya, and vätsalya—each according to individual taste, whereas those of female
form serve Kåñëa as mothers in vätsalya-bhäva, or as gopés in mädhurya-bhäva,
according to their own taste.

“Since the nitya-siddhas are either male or female, the sädhakas take on a mood
and gender corresponding to the particular nitya-siddha of whom they take
shelter.” 

Vrajanätha, “How may those devotees, who in this world possess a male body,
serve Çré Kåñëa with the mood of the vraja-gopés?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Those pure devotees who have entered rägänuga
sädhana-bhakti in mädhurya-rasa, the conjugal mellow, may have an male external
body here upon earth, however, internally they possess a spiritual female form
in the transcendental realm. They take shelter of a particular vraja-gopé of
their choice and according to their individual predisposition follow and serve
Çré Kåñëa in their innate spiritual identity as female attendants. The Padma
Puräëa narrates an incident in corroboration of this concept. Attracted by His
exquisite beauty, the great sages of the Daëòakäraëya Forest desired to have Çré
Räma as their husband and took this aspiration as their internal meditation.
Later, when Çré Kåñëa manifested His pastimes in Gokula, these sages were born
in female bodies and entered the pastimes as gopés, steeped in mädhurya-bhäva,
conjugal mood.”

Vrajanätha, “The scriptures tell us that the gopés of Gokula in the spiritual
sky are nitya-siddha manifesting in Vraja-dhäma upon earth to enhance the
transcendental pastimes of Çré Kåñëa. In this be so, how may the statement of
the Padma Puräëa regarding the Daëòakäraëya sages be harmonised with this
description of the gopés of Gokula?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The nitya-siddha gopés manifest in the material world
to participate in the rasa-lélä dance of Çré Kåñëa at Gokula. However, in
addition to them, there is another category of gopés, who are sädhana-siddhas.
Having attained perfection through kämarüpa-sädhana bhakti, they are elevated to
the pastimes in Gokula. According to the Çrémad Bhägavatam, 10.29.8, where it is
said ...tä väryamäëäù patibhiù... ‘By serving Çré Kåñëa in meditation, when
hindered by their mothers, fathers, husbands and brothers from meeting Govinda,
they [the sädhana-siddha gopés] abandoned their external material bodies and
regained their original purely spiritual forms, and in these forms they attained
the association of Çré Kåñëa in His räsa-lélä pastime.’ Many of these
sädhana-siddha gopés were previously the Daëòakäraëya sages who had performed
rägänuga sädhana-bhakti with the conjugal mood in their hearts towards Kåñëa.
Thus, later, they acquired transcendental forms as gopés in Vraja.”

Vrajanätha, “Bäbäjé, who are the nitya-siddhas, and who are the
sädhana-siddhas?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The complete embodiment of Çré Kåñëa’s svarüpa-çakti is
Çrématé Rädhäräëé. Her immediate personal expansions are the añöa-sakhés, the
eight principal gopés, who further expand as the nitya-siddha gopés, who are
thus the käya-vyüha, bodily expansions, of Çrématé Rädhäräëi. They are all
nitya-siddha, eternally perfect, and not in the category of jéva-çakti; they are
an exclusive class of their own, being the expansions of the svarüpa-çakti of
Kåñëa, Çrématé Rädhäräëé.

“The general sakhés of Vraja had attained perfection through their intense
engagement in rägänuga sädhana-bhakti and were later elevated to associate with
the nitya-siddha expansions of Çrématé Rädhikä; they are perfect examples of
sädhana-siddha jévas. By being imbued with the hlädiné-çakti by the mercy of
Çrématé Rädhikä, they have attained sälokya to serve with the nitya-siddha
vraja-gopés. 

“Those devotees who are engaged in rägänuga-bhakti in mädhurya-rasa are elevated
as sakhés, i.e. gopé friends of Çrématé Rädhikä, when they attain perfection.
Other sädhakas may endeavour solely upon the path of vaidhé-bhakti—putting aside
the internal practices of rägänuga-bhakti—to satisfy the riraàsa, amorous
desires, of Çré Kåñëa with deference to çästric import. Later, when leaving
their bodies these practitioners of exclusive vaidhé-bhakti may serve Kåñëa in
Dvärakä as His married queens. The practice of taking shelter of Çré Rädhä, the
Goddess of Vraja, and Her vraja-gopés is outside the curriculum of
vaidhé-bhakti-märga, the path of regulative devotion. Thus, only those who
nurture rägänuga-bhakti internally and practice the vaidhé-bhakti discipline
externally will obtain the perfection of service in Vraja.” 

Vrajanätha, “How are one’s transcendental riraàsa, amorous desires, satisfied in
the conjugal mellow?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The sädhakas who are attracted to Çré Kåñëa in the mood
of the queens of Dvärakä do not adopt the wiles and caprices of the vraja-gopés.
Unable to take on the temperament of the vraja-gopés, they cultivate instead
mahiñé-bhäva, the service attitude of dedicated wives for their husbands.” 

Vrajanätha, “Please further clarify this subject.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The mood of the Dvärakä queens is described as svakéyä,
the bond of love between a legally wedded wife and her husband. The mood of
service of the vraja-gopés to Kåñëa, on the contrary, is called parakéya, that
of a paramour for her secret lover. The Dvärakä queens cannot realize the
ever-expanding parakéya-rasa of the vraja-gopés. Thus, the only way to relish
this most intimate vraja-rasa is to practise rägänuga-bhakti following the
parakéya-bhäva of the vraja-gopés.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurujé, by your mercy and lucid explanations I have understood all
that you have said so far. However, is there any difference between käma and
prema? If they are the same, is not the use of the word prema sufficient? The
word käma adds a slightly jarring note.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Yes, there are differences. The word prema is relevant
to sambandha-rüpa rägätmikä-bhakti, which has no involvement with käma, because
in the mellow of sambandha-rüpa rägätmikä-bhakti the relationship between Kåñëa
and the devotee is that of fellow family members. This mellow of familial
relationship with Kåñëa is bereft of sambhoga-icchä, the desire for amorous
self-satisfaction, so to use käma in this context would be a gross mistake.
Sambandha-rüpa räga-bhakti is certainly prema, but without the aspect of keli,
amorous overtures and passion. When the element of sambhoga-icchä is mixed with
simple prema, the two emotions amalgamate to create käma-rüpa räga-bhakti, which
is only present in mädhurya-rasa, not in the other mellows. The vraja-gopés are
the sole inheritors and possessors of this käma-rüpa-bhakti. 

“On the material level, mundane käma is concerned with the satisfaction of the
material body and senses and is thus entirely distinct from spiritual käma.
Material lust is the perverted form of spiritual love. The lust, which Kubjä
felt for Kåñëa in Mathurä, though directed towards Kåñëa, cannot be described as
transcendental käma. Material lust is selfishly directed to gratify one’s own
senses; hence, it is low and despicable. Whereas, käma, when it is an aspect of
prema is transcendentally blissful, divine and selfless. Therefore, we should
not hesitate to use the term apräkåta käma, transcendental lust.”

Vrajanätha, “Kindly explain sambandha-rüpa rägänuga-bhakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “To internally meditate upon and adopt the spiritual
mellow of being Kåñëa’s father, mother, or another familial relationship is
known as sambandha-rägänuga-bhakti. In this mood of bhakti, there are three
rasas: däsya, sakhya, and vätsalya. The vrajaväsés embody the pristine mood of
such relationships by asserting, ‘I am Kåñëa’s servitor,’ ‘I am Kåñëa’s friend,’
‘I am Kåñëa’s father or mother,’ and so forth.” 

Vrajanätha, “How does a devotee execute rägänuga-bhakti within the mellows of
däsya, sakhya, and vätsalya rasas?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Those devotees who relish däsya-rasa internally emulate
the sublime service mood of prominent servitors like Raktaka, Patraka and other
nitya-siddhas of that mellow. Those in sakhya-rasa internally follow the
bhäva-ceñöita-mudrä—mood, aspirations, and specific activities—of Subala,
Çrédämä, and other nitya-siddhas of this mellow. Similarly, in vätsalya rasa
devotees internally follow the bhäva-ceñöita-mudrä of Nanda Mahäräja, Mother
Yaçodä and others of that mellow in their service to Kåñëa.”

Vrajanätha, “What does to follow the bhäva-ceñöita-mudrä mean?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Intrinsic to the permanent bhäva of a nitya-siddha,
there are ceñöita, specific aspirations, which thereby manifest certain
activities of devotional service known as mudrä and vyavahära. Seeing these
activities, the sädhaka aspires to perform the same activities in his service to
Kåñëa. For instance, a devotee following Nanda Mahäräja in vätsalya rasa,
overcome with bhäva, aspires to perform the same activities as those of Nanda
Mahäräja in his service to Kåñëa. However, the devotee must never take himself
to be Nanda Mahäräja, Subala, or Raktaka, but must remain subservient to the
nitya-siddha whom he is emulating and meditate upon and thus inculcate that
bhäva in his own service to Kåñëa. The aspiring devotee commits a serious
offence, if he imagines himself to be the nitya-siddha whom he is emulating.” 

Vrajanätha, “Which type of rägänuga-bhakti are we eligible to practice?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “My son, you must analyse your own partiality. Your
spiritual temperament will mirror your ruci and that ruci will guide you to your
favoured transcendental rasa. Surrender to the nitya-siddha stalwart of a
particular rasa of your own choice, try to imbibe his or her bhäva, and thus
practice rägänuga-bhakti. If you have developed a relish for räga-bhakti, follow
it with activities that are appropriate and supportive. If you have not yet
developed firm and steady attachment for räga-bhakti, sincerely pursue the
regulated path of vaidhé-bhakti with full confidence in its eventual fruition.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I have been studying the Çrémad Bhägavatam for a long time
and I am always eager for an opportunity to hear about the pastimes of Çré
Kåñëa. Whenever I meditate upon the wonderful deeds and frolics of the Lord,
certain emotions are stirred up within me. I strongly feel the desire to serve
the Divine Couple in the mood of Çré Lalitä devé.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Yes, I understand your mood; you are a maïjaré under
the guidance of Lalitä devé. To what type of service do you aspire?”

Vijaya, “I feel that Çré Lalitä devé wants me to string flower garlands. I would
like to pick beautiful flowers, string garlands, and lay them in the divine
hands of Lalitä devé. Upon receiving them, she will flash me a brilliant and
merciful smile and gently slip them around the exquisitely beautiful faces of
Çrématé Rädhikä and Çré Kåñëa.” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “I bless you my boy! Let your endeavours for such
devotional service be consummated in spiritual perfection.”

Having been showered with such a blessing, Vijaya-kumära was overwhelmed and
fell at the feet of Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, weeping profusely. Very pleased with
the sincere mood of devotion of Vijaya-kumära, Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé said to
him, “My son, continue your practice of rägänuga-bhakti in this manner: Always
execute the vaidhé-bhakti limbs externally, but cultivate intense räga-bhakti
within.”

Vrajanätha was inspired upon seeing the good fortune of Vijaya-kumära and
Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé’s demonstration of compassion, so he said to Raghunätha
däsa Bäbäjé, “Mahäräja, whenever I meditate upon the pastimes of Kåñëa, an urge
to serve Kåñëa under the guidance of Subala strongly compels me.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “What devotional service attracts you most?” 

Vrajanätha, “Together with Subala, I imagine myself to be running after the
straying calves of Kåñëa’s herd and bringing them back to the fold. Kåñëa sits
there playing his flute, and Subala, next to Him, then asks me to take the
calves for feed and water and afterwards bring them back to Kåñëa.” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “I bless you to serve Kåñëa under the direction of
Subala. You are eligible for sakhya-rasa.”

Then a miracle happened, from that moment on Vijaya’s heart throbbed with
anticipation, waiting for the slightest indication to perform any service for
Lalitä devé. He saw Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé with a new understanding—as a
manifestation of Lalitä devé, in person.” 

Vijaya asked, “Are there any further instructions regarding rägänuga bhajana?” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé replied, “You have received most of the information.
Nevertheless, there are other details you must know pertaining to your spiritual
identity—your name, form, dress, etc. Come to me alone and I will reveal them to
you.” Vijaya-kumära then prostrated himself before his guru in deep gratitude. 

On the other hand, Vrajanätha saw his guru, Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, from that
moment on as a manifestation of Subala. Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé also asked him to
come alone later, so that he could be given the details of his spiritual
identity—his name, form, dress, etc. Similarly, Vrajanätha prostrated himself
before his guru and offered heartfelt prayers at his lotus feet.

That evening, fully absorbed in rägänuga-bhakti consciousness, Vrajanätha and
Vijaya-kumära felt indescribably elated. Externally, as they continued their
life as usual, no visible changes could be seen. In their hearts, however,
Vijaya-kumära developed the transcendental female sentiments of a vraja-gopé and
Vrajanätha nurtured the spiritual temperament of a vraja-gopa, young cowherd boy
of Vraja. Like a miracle, all these internal adjustments took place just within
moments of receiving a pure devotee’s mystical touch. It is, of course, true
that everything had already been there in a latent form.

Late that night, Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha begged leave from Çré Raghunätha
däsa Bäbäjé Mahäräja and walked slowly towards the Bilva Puñkariëé Lake chanting
the mahä-mantra upon their tulasé beads:

Hare Kåñëa Hare Kåñëa Kåñëa Kåñëa Hare Hare
Hare Räma Hare Räma Räma Räma Hare Hare

Moonlight flooded the countryside, revealing purple shadows in the landscape.
The air was still and welcoming. Upon approaching the Lakñmaëa Tila mound, they
sought the silent shadow of an ämalaké tree and sat down. Vijaya-kumära inquired
softly, “Well, Vrajanätha, our wishes have been fulfilled. You will surely
receive the mercy of Çré Kåñëa by the grace of such a pure Vaiñëava. Here and
now, it is best to decide upon your future course of action. Tell me honestly,
what do you want, marriage or life as a mendicant? I do not wish to influence
your decision in anyway; I merely want to know so that I may explain the facts
to your mother.” 

Vrajanätha, “Uncle, I respect and love you, moreover you are a scholar and a
Vaiñëava. In the absence of my father, you are my guardian; I am ready to accept
anything you say. The reason I want to avoid marriage is because I fear I may
become materially attached and forget the spiritual goal. What is your opinion?”


Vijaya, “You must consider all aspects and come to a conclusion, but without my
interference.” 

Vrajanätha, “I strongly feel that I must discuss this matter with Çré Gurudeva
and then act.” 

Vijaya, “That is the best idea. We will find out the instruction of Çré Gurudeva
on this tomorrow.”

Vrajanätha, “Uncle, what have you decided? Are you planning to remain in your
household, or go travelling?” 

Vijaya, “Son, I am also faced with this dilemma. Sometimes, I think I must
emancipate myself from the flames of household life and go on an endless
pilgrimage, but the next moment, I think that this might steel my heart.
Bhakti-rasa does not blossom in an arid heart, and I do not want to be deprived
of this rasa. Therefore, I also have made up my mind to find out the truth from
our Gurudeva tomorrow and then follow his orders.”

With this firm decision, they stood up and murmuring softly the mahä-mantra
walked slowly back to the house, where they honoured prasädam and lay down for a
night of rest.

Thus ends the twenty-first chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma:
Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana, Part Nine: Abhidheya:
Rägänuga-sädhana-bhakti, the Practice of Spontaneous Devotional Service

JDH 22: Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Chapter Twenty-two
Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Part Ten: The Initial Discussion of Prayojana, the Highest Goal of Life

As it was Ekädaçé, the Vaiñëavas had assembled in Çréväsäìgana under the bakula
tree and were performing a melodious kértana. Many sighed loudly the names of
Çré Nityänanda and Çré Gauräìga in blissful joy. Amidst all this, the elderly
Çré Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé Mahäräja sat pensively, steeped in meditation. After
a long time, he suddenly exclaimed, “Alas! Alas!” and tears streamed down his
cheeks. He sobbed, “Oh where, Oh where are my beloved Rüpa and Sanätana! And
where are my Däsa Gosvämé and my dearest soul Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja! I am cast into
the lonely well of separation and feel most despondent. When I think of
Rädhä-kuëòa, I feel unbearable pain; my life is slipping away. O Rüpa! O
Raghunätha! Have mercy! Let me see you once again; that will return me to life.
How can I still live in your absence! My life is but a disgrace!” 

After saying this, Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé began to roll upon the ground, finally
coming to rest on his back. Rushing to the supine Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, the
Vaiñëavas tried to placate him, “Bäbäjé Mahäräja, please calm down. Rüpa and
Raghunätha are in your heart. And just see, Çri Çré Nitäi Caitanya are dancing
before you.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé immediately stood up with surprising alacrity, inquiring,
“Where? Where?” Spotting the exquisite Deity forms of the Païcatattva upon the
altar, his distress dissipated and his composure returned. He said, “O blessed
Mäyäpura! You are the only place upon earth that drives away the pangs of
separation felt in the absence of the Lord’s pastimes.” He then lifted his arms,
swaying in gentle dancing movements. 

Finally he went and sat in his kuöéra, where Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha later
found him in quiet repose. They fell flat before him in humble submission.
Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé was indeed happy to see them and asked, “How is your
chanting and practice of bhakti?”

With folded hands, they replied, “Dear Gurudeva, your blessings mean everything
to us. We must have performed innumerable pious deeds to have attained sanctuary
under your lotus feet. In accordance with your instructions, we are observing
Ekädaçé fasting today without drinking water and have come to receive your
blessings.” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “You are truly fortunate souls. Very soon you will be
elevated to the platform of bhäva-bhakti.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, what does the platform of bhäva-bhakti mean? Is it something
you have not yet taught us?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Whatever I have discussed with you so far belongs to
sädhana-bhakti. After extended and tenacious performance of sädhana-bhakti, a
devotee is promoted to siddhavasthä, the platform of perfection, whose first
stages are known as bhäva-avasthä. A description is given in first part of the
tenth çloka of the Daça-müla-çikñä:

svarüpävasthäne madhura-rasa-bhävodaya iha
vraje rädhä-kåñëa-svajana-jana-bhävaà hådi vahan
paränande prétià jagad-atula-sampat-sukham atho
viläsäkhye tattve parama-paricaryäà sa labhate

“‘The jéva attains his svarüpa when his sädhana-bhakti matures. At this stage,
the hlädiné-çakti endows him with bhäva in madhura-rasa, honey-like nectarine
mellows, as he aspires to become a servant of one of the eternal associates of
Çré Rädhä Kåñëa in Vraja. Even whilst in this world, he is employed in the
unalloyed service of the supreme embodiment of sublime bliss and experiences
ineffable exultation. To attain this transcendental treasure is of unsurpassable
value for the jéva.’

“The second part of the tenth Daça-müla-çikñä çloka describes prema, the
prayojana of humanity. As already explained, bhäva is the initial stage of
prema:

prabhuù kaù ko jévaù katham idam acid viçvam iti vä
vicäryaitän arthän hari-bhajana-kåc-chästra-caturaù
abhedäçäà dharmän sakalam aparädhaà pariharan
harer nämänandaà pibati hari-däso hari-janaiù

“‘Who is Kåñëa? Who am I, the jéva? What is this inert world of matter? What is
the transcendental spiritual world? The faithful devotee who is totally
surrendered to the service of the Supreme Lord must review these questions
thoroughly, know well the pertinent scriptural conclusions, and apply them
positively. He will then completely repudiate the monistic philosophy of
impersonal liberation, rise above the stipulations of pious and impious deeds,
and cease committing devotional offences. He must seek only saintly association,
in that company drink the immortal nectar of harinäma and thus experience
inexplicable eternal joy as the servant of Çré Hari.’

“The Daça-müla-çikñä is a magnificent bouquet of transcendental teachings
compiled from the entire set of instructions spoken by the Supreme Lord Çré
Caitanya Himself.”

Vijaya, “Bäbäjé, if possible, I wish to hear concisely about the glories of the
Daça-müla-çikñä.” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Take note of this verse from the Daça-müla-mähätmya:

saàsevya daça-mülam vai hitvä ‘vidyäm ayam janaù
bhäva-puñtià tathä tuñtià labhate sädhu-saìgataù

“‘By assimilating and emulating the teachings of the Daça-müla-çikñä, the jéva
uproots the poisonous ivy of ignorance. Thereafter, in the association of
saintly Vaiñëavas, he nourishes the creeper of bhakti with bhäva and experiences
rewarding satisfaction.’”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, kindly permit us to enrich our intellect with the teachings
of Daça-müla-çikñä. We will study the Daça-müla-çikñä daily and offer this
practice in glorification of Çré Caitanya. We wish to hear in detail about the
concept of bhäva.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “If prema is compared to the sun, then bhäva is the rays
of the sun. Bhäva is transcendental emotion composed of viçuddha-sattva, pure
transcendental goodness, and it blossoms in the svarüpa of the jéva. This is the
svarüpa-lakñaëa, intrinsic symptom, of bhäva. Another term for bhäva is rati;
others may prefer to designate bhäva as premäìkura, the buds of prema. The
svarüpa-çakti is the all-illuminating internal potency of Çré Kåñëa. One of its
prime characteristics is known as saàvit, also known as viçuddha-sattva, which
is always transcendental to the material nature. When this consciousness of
viçuddha-sattva emulsifies with the hlädiné-çakti, bhäva is produced.

“With the help of saàvit, the devotee acquires lucid comprehension of the
ultimate objective of life, Çré Kåñëa, and through hlädiné he is blessed with
relish of that ultimate objective. Çré Kåñëa is only realized by the agency of
His unlimited personal saàvit-çakti, the svarüpa-çakti-våtti. He cannot be
realized by the minuscule saàvit-çakti of the individual jéva. When the
saàvit-çakti of the svarüpa-çakti of the Lord blossoms in the heart of the
devotee by the mercy of the Lord or the Lord’s pure devotee, only then does the
devotee become fully enlightened and enlivened with perception of the spiritual
world.

“The spiritual world is the manifestation of viçuddha-sattva, whereas the
material world is composed of a mixture of the three material qualities: sattva,
raja, and tama. When the hlädiné-çakti appears and combines with the perception
of the spiritual world bestowed by the saàvit-çakti in the heart of the devotee,
the devotee begins to relish the transcendental realm with increasing bhäva.
When this enrelishment of the transcendental realm intensifies many-fold and is
fully consummated, bhäva is converted into prema. If this prema is taken to be
the sun, then bhäva makes up the sunrays. The unique symptom of bhäva is that it
completely cleanses the heart of impurities and softens the heart to a state
where it can easily melt. 

“The word ruci indicates three desires within the heart of the transcendentally
aspiring jéva: präpty-abhiläña, the constant desire for union with the coveted
object; änukülya-abhiläña; a desire for the favour of the coveted object; and
sauhärda-abhiläña, a feeling of affinity for the coveted object from the core of
the heart. The first stirrings of bhäva are shown by a light display of ecstatic
symptoms such as horripilation, etc. In nitya-siddha devotees, bhäva is
constantly present, ready to manifest itself at any moment in the full splendour
of the eight sattvika-bhävas, manifestations of transcendental ecstasy. In
conditioned souls, bhäva—though in nature actually self-manifest from the
transcendental plane—appears as though manifested by the individual’s own
temperament and personality.

“In either case, the natural function of bhäva is to independently reveal the
transcendental form, identity and pastimes of Çré Kåñëa. Bhäva appears to be an
emotion, a part of the human psyche—which it is not—and is apparently caused by
a catalyst external to itself. However, bhäva, or rati, constitutionally is a
transcendental object of relishment bestowed upon the jéva and mercifully
enables the souls imprisoned in the material world to relish the nectarean
spiritual qualities of Kåñëa and His transcendental pastimes.”

Vrajanätha, “Are there different varieties of bhäva?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Yes, according to their different sources, there are
two varieties of bhäva originating from Çré Kåñëa and His pure devotees:
sädhana-abhiniveça-ja-bhäva, bhäva arising through sädhana; and
prasäda-ja-bhäva, bhäva arising through mercy. Bhäva generally implies the
former; the latter is extremely rare.” 

Vrajanätha, “Kindly describe sädhana-abhiniveça-ja-bhäva.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “This particular bhäva is of two kinds, corresponding to
the two paths of sädhana-bhakti: vaidhé and rägänuga. Initially, bhäva generates
ruci in the heart of the devotee; later äsakti, attachment for the Lord; and
finally rati, love. The scriptures and the Vedic science of the performing arts
treat bhäva and rati as synonyms and so will I. In vaidhé-bhakti, bhäva is in an
unmanifest state known as çraddhä. First, çraddhä matures and becomes niñöhä,
steadfastness, which produces ruci, taste. In rägänuga-bhakti, however, bhäva
generates ruci right from the beginning.” 

Vrajanätha, “What is prasäda-ja-bhäva?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “When bhäva voluntarily evokes itself without waiting
for the application of either vaidhé-bhakti or rägänuga-bhakti, it is defined
either as kåñëa-prasäda-ja-bhäva, or kåñëa-bhakta-prasäda-ja-bhäva.”

Vrajanätha, “How may kåñëa-prasäda-ja-bhäva be described?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Kåñëa-prasäda, Kåñëa’s mercy, is of three types:
väcika, by words; äloka-däna, by granting vision; and härda, by grace manifest
in the heart. Examples showing that Kåñëa gives all three types of mercy are
found in the scriptures. In väcika, Kåñëa simply promises His devotee by His
word, and immediately the all-blessing crest-jewel embodiment of divine bliss
and transcendentally wilful bhakti that only seeks to serve Kåñëa awakens as
bhäva within the devotee’s heart. An example of äloka-däna-kåpä is the mercy
given to the sages of the Daëòakäraëya Forest who had never seen the Supreme
Lord previously. Yet, as soon as they beheld the Lord Çré Räma, their hearts
were flooded with bhäva and bhakti simply by the mercy of the Lord. Bhäva that
spontaneously sprouts within the heart, as in the case of Çréla Sukadeva
Gosvämé, is a result of härda-kåpä, the causeless mercy of the Lord.”

“In the pastimes of the Supreme Lord’s full incarnation as Çré Caitanya, all
three types of kåñëa-prasäda-ja-bhäva were amply displayed. In many places where
the Lord travelled, countless scores of passers-by who either just saw Him or
witnessed His ecstatic dancing were surcharged with transcendental bhäva because
of His äloka-däna-kåpä. The despicable brothers, Jagäi and Mädhäi, were showered
with väcika-kåpä. They experienced inexplicable bhäva just by hearing the
pronouncement of the Lord. And, the Lord infused the heart of Çréla Jéva Gosvämé
with härda-kåpä-bhäva.”

Vrajanätha, “Kindly describe the kåñëa-bhakta-prasäda-ja-bhäva.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Dhruva Mahäräja, Prahläda Mahäräja and many others
received the mercy of the great devotee, Çréla Närada Muni, which filled their
hearts with bhäva, finally elevating them to become crest-jewels amongst the
devotees of the Lord. By the mercy of Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, Sanätana Gosvämé and
other eternal associates of the Lord, innumerable persons have been inspired to
engage in çuddha-bhakti.”

Vijaya, “What are the symptoms of bhävodaya, the awakening of bhäva?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Anubhävas are emotions that act as precursors
ultimately evoking bhäva. They are nine in number: kñänti, tolerance; avyartha
kälatva, the feeling that any engagement outside the service of Kåñëa is a waste
of time; virakti, detachment; mäna-çünyatä, pridelessness; äçä-bandha, constant
hopefulness; samutkaëöhä, enthusiasm; sarvadä näma-gäne ruci, constant relishing
of harinäma and glorification of Çré Kåñëa; kåñëa-guëäkhyäne äsaktis, eagerness
to hear about the qualities of Çré Kåñëa; and kåñëa-vasati-sthale préti, loving
and honouring those places connected with Çré Kåñëa.” 

Vijaya, “What is kñänti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “A situation wherein a person exercises tolerance,
although he would have every reason to become perturbed and agitated, is known
as kñänti. Another name is kñamä, compassion, forgiveness and peacefulness.” 

Vijaya, “What is avyartha kälatva?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “When a person is fully engaged in serving the Supreme
Lord wishing to avoid wasting time on non-devotional activities, it is called
avyartha-kälatva.”

Vijaya, “What is virakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Virakti is defined as the spontaneous feeling of
distaste for objects of sense gratification.”

Vijaya, “Could a person who has received the bheka initiation of a renunciant be
described as someone possessing virakti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Bheka is more a social custom than anything else. When
bhäva is enthroned in the heart, relish of the spiritual realm increases and the
attraction for sensual pleasures diminishes until it is finally eliminated. This
is known as the stage of virakti. Hence, any devotee who takes bheka after
attaining virakti for the simple reason of minimizing his bodily necessities is
called a virakti-vaiñëava. Anyone who puts on the robes of a renunciant before
having reached the stage of bhäva is a charlatan and his status is not bona
fide. Çré Caitanya highlighted this principle by chastising Choöa Haridäsa.”

Vijaya, “What is the meaning of mäna-çünyatä?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Pride is fuelled by one’s noble caste and creed, high
social status, wealth, strength, beauty, power, etc. Therefore, a person who
possesses all these attributes and remains prideless is actually mäna-çünyatä.
The Padma Puräëa narrates the story of a very powerful king who became a devotee
of Çré Kåñëa. He abdicated his kingship, left his palace and opulences, and
wandered over to his enemy’s kingdom, living there by begging for the bare
necessities of life. Like a honeybee, he collected a little from everyone. He
never reflected on his previous status, but respected the brähmaëas and even the
caëòälas, dog-eaters.”

Vijaya, “What is the meaning of äçä-bandha?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Äçä-bandha means to be convinced that Çré Kåñëa will
surely shower His mercy some day and to continue to serve and meditate upon Him
with such a conviction.” 

Vijaya, “What is the meaning of samutkaëöhä?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “To muster enthusiastically all means to acquire one’s
coveted object is called samutkaëöhä.” 

Vijaya, “What is the meaning of sarvadä näma-gäne ruci?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, Yes, the next item is sarvadä näma-gäne ruci, the
constant taste for chanting harinäma. When a devotee fully comprehends that of
all the various limbs of devotional practice chanting harinäma is the most
effective, he engages his entire time in chanting with great çraddhä. Ruci for
chanting is the prime cause for the topmost spiritual success. However, we will
discuss the science of chanting and the truth about harinäma separately another
day.” 

Vijaya, “What is the meaning of kåñëa-guëäkhyäne äsaktis?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “In the Çré Kåñëa-karëämåta, verse 65, there is a
reference to the eagerness to hear about Kåñëa’s glories:

mädhuryäd api madhuraà manmathatä tasya kimapi kaiçoram
cäpalyäd api capalaà, ceto vata harati hanta kià kurmaù

“‘O how exquisite is His ever-fresh youthful beauty. It is sweeter than the
honeysuckle flowers. His adolescent restiveness enchants and defies definition.
All these nectarean qualities of that transcendental Cupid have stolen my heart
and soul. What am I to do?’ 

“The more a devotee hears or speaks about the wonderful qualities and pastimes
of Kåñëa, the more he becomes attracted to them—he is never satiated and his
attachment for hearing these wonders continues to expand.”

Vijaya, “What is kåñëa-vasati-sthale préti?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Kåñëa-vasati-sthale préti means to love and honour the
dhämas where the Lord performed His pastimes. While circumambulating the dhäma,
a devotee may enquire from the devotees and residents, “O residents of the
dhäma, where is the birthplace of the Lord? Where did Mahäprabhu dance in
ecstatic saìkértana? Where would Kåñëa frolic with the gopas during His forenoon
pürvähëa-lélä?” The pilgrim is answered by the residents, “Here is Mäyäpura.
That raised area adorned by many tulasé plants is the Yoga-péöha where the Lord
appeared. See these villages Gaìgänagara, Simuliyä, Gädigächä, Mäjdéa; they are
some of the places where Mahäprabhu lead His first saìkértana processions.” As
he hears the time-honoured glories of the dhämas mixed with the prema from the
lips of a resident of the dhäma, the devotee feels a divine ambrosia filling his
ears that sends him into an ecstatic trance; he sheds profuse tears with his
hair standing on end whilst immersed in ecstasy of bhäva.”

Vrajanätha, “When such a flow of ecstatic emotions is inspired, are we to
conclude that rati for Kåñëa is within the devotee?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Not necessarily. The independent, spontaneous effusion
of feelings within the heart for Kåñëa is rati, transcendental loving
attachment. However, shedding tears and such emotions can be inspired by other
conditions, which are not necessarily rati.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, kindly illustrate this point with a few examples.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “An aspirant for mukti chants kåñëa-näma at the stage of
nämäbhäsa, the shadow of çuddha-näma. He hears that nämäbhäsa has the power to
give mukti and is provided with the relevant çästric pramäëa. When he hears this
proof, he is stirred to profuse tears and falls down in a faint. This cannot be
described as kåñëa-rati, because he has no spontaneous and unalloyed attraction
for Kåñëa. He simply displays these emotions, which are nearly bhäva, i.e.
bhäväbhäsa, only out of covetousness for his personal objective and the fact
that such practices may help him to achieve the same. 

“Further, a seeker of mundane pleasure worships Durgä-devé, praying for the
materialistic boons of health and wealth, etc. He learns about the mystic
potency of the Durgä-devé to fulfil such wishes and is moved to tears, rolls on
the ground, and so on. These symptoms are not bhäva; at best, they are
bhäväbhäsa, or perhaps even bhäva-daurätmya, crocodile tears with evil intent.
Whatever the case may be true bhäva symptoms are never manifest or experienced
without a long history of constant devotional service with unalloyed motivation
to love Çré Kåñëa.

“Aspirations for bhukti and mukti—even if they happen to be related to
Kåñëa—sometimes invoke bhäväbhäsa symptoms that are often also bhäva-daurätmya
symptoms. The emotions shown by persons who are contaminated by mäyävädé
thoughts are all bhäva-daurätmya. Even if such a person has been lying
unconscious before the Deity of Kåñëa for days, it cannot be called bhäva. 

“Even the most elevated liberated souls and sages who have categorically
renounced the world intensely aspire to attain bhäva. Bhäva is the recondite
treasure that Kåñëa rarely discloses even to those who have been engaged in
bhajana for immeasurably extended periods. So how can this divine bhäva,
kåñëa-rati, blossom in arid hearts devoid of çuddha-bhakti where the desire for
either bhukti or mukti surges?”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, sometimes while performing harinäma-kértana hedonistic
men and salvationists exhibit the symptoms you have just described. What
feelings are these?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Only ignorant and foolish people are impressed by such
a show-bottle display of emotions. Those who are actually conversant with the
philosophy of bhäva will immediately recognize them as rati-äbhäsa duplications
which should be carefully avoided.”

Vijaya, “How many kinds of rati-äbhäsa are there?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “There are two varieties of rati-äbhäsa:
pratibimba-rati-äbhäsa, a reflected semblance of rati; and chäyä-rati-äbhäsa, a
shadow-like semblance of rati.” 

Vijaya, “What is pratibimba-rati-äbhäsa?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Mukti cannot be attained without knowledge of Brahman.
The process to acquire this knowledge is extremely tedious and difficult. A
person may desire mukti, but does not want to embark on the strict disciplines
required by this path. He learns that by chanting of Çré Hari’s name, one is
rewarded with mukti and considers that this chanting is easy to perform. When he
imagines how easily Brahman realization could be thus acquired, strong emotions
well up and he begins to cry, his hair stands on end, and so on. This is
pratibimba-rati-äbhäsa and nothing more spectacular.” 

Vrajanätha, “Why is the term pratibimba, reflection, used here?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “When kértana is properly performed it brings joy.
Therefore, when hedonists and emancipationists, both striving for their
respective goals, come by great fortune into association with saintly Vaiñëavas
and join in kértana with them, the spontaneous emotion of bhäva which appears in
the hearts of the Vaiñëavas is also slightly reflected like the soothing,
sublime moon in the hearts of these non-devotees, as a result of their close
proximity with the Vaiñëavas.

“However, the pristine form of bhäva is never manifest in the hearts of
hedonists and salvationists. They are thrilled to see the bhäva symptoms
displayed in the Vaiñëavas, which in turn inspires them to experience a mere
reflected semblance. The pratibimba-rati-äbhäsa form of rati-äbhäsa is generally
detrimental to most persons. It does not bring eternal good fortune, but merely
awards the mundane pleasure of sensual bliss and the relief of emancipation,
thereafter becoming depleted and impotent. To call this phenomenon nämäparädha,
offence against kåñëa-näma, would not be mistaken.”

Vrajanätha, “What is chäyä-rati-äbhäsa?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Simple, kaniñöha devotees who are inexperienced in the
intricacies of spiritual science curiously perceive the slight stirrings of
bhäva symptoms in their hearts when they come into contact with the favoured
places, holy occasions, pastimes, etc., of the Supreme Lord. These bhäva
symptoms are factually the nebulous, shadow form of real spiritual emotions;
hence, they are designated as chäyä, shadow. At this stage, the bhakti of the
neophyte is a little more distinct, but not yet firm. The chäyä-rati-äbhäsa form
of rati-äbhäsa appears particularly at this juncture.

“Chäyä-rati-äbhäsa occurs as a result of scores of pious deeds and may gradually
lead the neophyte to higher realization and greater spiritual fortune.
Especially, by frequent association with saintly and elevated Vaiñëavas, who
give their mercy as a catalyst, the real and pristine form of çuddha-bhäva may
easily appear from this raw ingredient called chäyä-rati, shadow attachment.
Though this form of chäyä-rati is highly beneficial to the neophyte, offences to
Vaiñëavas will trigger off reversals in spiritual practice, painfully causing
the chäyä-rati to dwindle like the waning moon of the dark fortnight. Even pure
çuddha-bhäva, what to speak of chäyä-bhäva, begins to wither if touched by the
poisonous tentacles of offences to the Vaiñëavas.

“Aspiring devotees must avoid close contact with adamant and zealous
salvationists, because in that association their bhäva will wilt and they may
begin to aspire for mukti or even begin to consider themselves the worshipable
Éçvara. Such sinister motives become obvious when ignorant neophytes dance or
sing arrogantly in kértana, desiring mukti or thinking that they have become the
Supreme Brahman. Lacking proper discrimination or knowledge, new devotees may
intimately and carelessly interact with die-hard salvationists; such loose
behaviour exerts a calamitous effect upon their devotional progress. Therefore,
neophytes in particular must shun the company of such non-devotees.

“In certain persons—even though they are not engaged in devotional service—bhäva
symptoms may suddenly appear. From such an occurrence, it may be surmised that
these persons have executed çuddha-bhakti in their previous lives, but because
of impediments at that time bhäva could not mature and fully manifest. As soon
as these unknown impediments are removed, symptoms of çuddha-bhäva appear and
are crystallized. This çuddha-bhäva is indeed kåñëa-prasäda-ja, evoking
reactions of wonder and amazement among the general public, and is bestowed by
the causeless mercy of Kåñëa.

“In the case where genuine çuddha-bhäva is reposed in a devotee, but certain
faults and discrepancies are discernable in his character, the devotee should
not be treated intemperately or intolerantly, because such a devotee imbued with
çuddha-bhäva is surely and increasingly lifted by this transcendental phenomenon
to sublime heights of spiritual success. Thus, such a devotee with çuddha-bhäva
cannot perform evil deeds. However, if such discrepancies are noted, then there
are two ways to see them: This elevated devotee has committed a sinful act by
some providential arrangement, but this is not a permanent slur on his
character; or the reactions of the devotee’s previous sins are still lingering
on even after the advent of çuddha-bhäva, though they will very soon recede and
cease. If any person insists on pinning blame and calumny on such a pure
devotee, he invites the wrath of nämäparädha upon himself. 

“Thus, the Nåsiàha Puräëa declares:

bhagavati ca haräv ananya-cetä bhåña-malino‘pi viräjate manuñyaù
na hi çaça-kaluña-cchavéù kadäcit timira-paro bhavatäm upaiti candraù 

“‘Just as the moon appears to have shadows and dark patches, but its glow is not
shrouded because of them; similarly, devotees who possess single-minded devotion
to the Supreme Lord in spite of having faults and blemishes—even those who have
committed most abominable acts—keep on radiating devotion because of their love
for the Lord.’

“This injunction must not mislead us to think that it is all right if devotees
become compulsive sinners. The fact is that the very desire for committing sins
is expunged once the devotee becomes steadfast in bhakti. Yet, as long as the
body is there, accidents may happen and thus a devotee may commit sins
inadvertently. As soon as that occurs, Bhakti devé instantly incinerates to
ashes the devotee’s sins and warns the devotee against repeating them. A devotee
who continuously commits sins has most certainly not developed ananya-bhakti to
the Lord, because a sincere devotee can never perpetrate devotionally fatal acts
shamelessly whilst relying on the absolving potency of Bhakti devé for this is a
serious offence.

“The nature of bhäva, i.e. rati, is to increase the desire of the devotee for
divine love gradually and constantly. Thus, because of its restless nature,
bhäva is volatile and embodies intense bliss. Although bhäva churns up the
torrid saïcäri-bhävas, impelling ecstatic emotions, still it remains more
soothing than a million moon-rays.”

At this point in their discussion, Vrajanätha and Vijaya appeared to be deeply
pondering over the concepts and principles of bhäva-tattva. Simultaneously
Bäbäjé Mahäräja seemed to withdraw into himself. However the two aspirants were
too excited and keen for knowledge to allow this unexpected lull to continue.
They respectfully asked their next question. 

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, your instructions are marvellous. They have opened the
floodgates of the immortal ambrosia of prema within us and extinguished the
flames of material entanglement in our hearts. We are inebriated by this nectar
and have lost our sense of direction. Where should we go? What should we do? 

“Alas! Oh Gurudeva, fie upon our brähmaëa birth that has poisoned the heart with
pride and arrogance! We do not possess a drop of humility, so how can we expect
to attain bhäva? Our only hope is attached to you, dear Gurudeva. You are an
eternal associate of the Lord, if you give us just the smallest iota of divine
prema, then everything will be perfect for us. On the basis of our spiritual
relationship with you, a new optimism is dawning within us. Spiritually we are
poverty-stricken and wretched, but you are an impressive bulwark amongst the
devotees of the Lord and most compassionate. So kindly, advise us of our real
responsibilities. A feeling inside me prompts me to turn my back upon family and
home and surrender at your feet so that I will be able to serve you always.”

Vijaya-kumära, patiently waiting for an opportune moment, interjected,
“Gurudeva, Vrajanätha is young and his mother wants him to enter household life,
but he is not prepared to do so. Kindly tell us what we should do.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “You have received Çré Kåñëa blessings. So, convert your
household into Kåñëa’s household and serve Him. May everyone follow the advice
of Çré Caitanya. There are two orders of devotees in the world, householders and
renunciants. A person must remain in the household until he is ready to renounce
that situation. In this way serve Kåñëa as a householder devotee. Our dear Çré
Caitanya displayed pastimes in His first twenty-four years as a householder,
which stand out as a perfect example for Vaiñëava householders. His pastimes in
the final twenty-four years as a renunciant are examples to be emulated by
renunciants and aspiring sannyäsés. 

“My recommendation to you is this: Study the householder life of the Lord and
sincerely try to follow in His footsteps, at least for the present. You must not
think that the highest level of kåñëa-prema is beyond the reach of the
householder devotees. The majority of the close associates of Mahäprabhu were
householders, and they were certainly the direct recipients of His mercy. Even
renunciant Vaiñëavas pray to be blessed by receiving the sacred dust of the
lotus feet of the Lord’s householder devotees upon their heads.”

Vijaya and Vrajanätha offered their obeisances to Çré Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé
Mahäräja and took leave. Though it was very late, they joined the other
Vaiñëavas of Çréväsäìgana and spent the rest of the night singing and chanting
kåñëa-näma. Early the next morning, they completed ablutions, took a bath, and
attended the spiritual programme in the temple. At noon, they honoured
mahä-prasädam with the Vaiñëavas, soon thereafter leaving and making their way
slowly back home.

At the Bilva Puñkariëé Lake, they sat down and—after considering all that they
had heard from Bäbäjé Mahäräja—decided to continue in household life and serve
Çré Kåñëa in that way. 

Vijaya-kumära broke the news to his sister, the mother of Vrajanätha, so she
could make all the necessary arrangements for the marriage of Vrajanätha. The
mother and grandmother of Vrajanätha were beside themselves with joy. Leaving
for a few days to Modadruma-dvépa, Vijaya-kumära was sent off with a new
wardrobe according to the custom. Upon reaching his destination, he immediately
sent his younger brother, Harinätha, to help the mother of Vrajanätha with the
preparations.

Thus ends the twenty-second chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma:
Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana, Part Ten: The Initial Discussion of
Prayojana, the Highest Goal of Life

JDH 23: Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Chapter Twenty-three
Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Part Eleven: The Initial Discussion of Näma-tattva

The village of Bilva Puñkariëé, skirted by the holy waters of the River Gaìgä on
the north and west, is set in picturesque surroundings. An exquisite temple of
Lord Çiva, named Bilva-pakña Mahädeva, is situated in the village on the banks
of a sparklingly clear pond whose waters are cooled in summer by the generous
shade of the bordering bilva trees. Not far from there is a place called
Bhavatäraëa. Nearby, at the periphery of Navadvépa town, lies the little hamlet
of Simuliyä, situated with Bilva Puñkariëé village on one side and the famous
Brähmaëa Puñkariëé Lake on the other. There on the northern side of the main
road between the Brähmaëa Puñkariëé Lake and Bilva Puñkariëé village the house
of Vrajanätha is peacefully located. 

After saying goodbye to his sister, Vijaya-kumära left for home. Nevertheless,
after a short distance, he turned around having made up his mind that he could
not return home without having properly understood the spiritual science of
chanting kåñëa-näma. Returning to the residence of his sister, he made her even
happier by announcing that he was going to remain for a few days more. 

That afternoon, Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha were relaxing in the courtyard upon
the Caëòé-maëòapa. The sun had traversed the better part of the day and was
preparing for a breathtakingly beautiful sunset, when two Vaiñëavas of the
Rämänuja-rämänandé sampradäya, disciplic succession, with Çré-tilaka markings
proudly upon their foreheads suddenly appeared near the entrance to Vrajanätha’s
abode. After looking around, they chose the inviting shelter of the jackfruit
tree in front of the house where they quietly collected strewn twigs, lit a
small crackling fire, and began to smoke hemp. 

Vrajanätha’s mother enjoyed showing hospitality to guests very much and
observing that the Vaiñëavas seemed hungry she sent them vegetables and grains.
Receiving them gladly, the sädhus immediately started preparing a simple meal of
vegetables and flat bread rotis that they offered silently to the Lord and then
honoured as prasädam. 

Vrajanätha and Vijaya-kumära—attracted by their calm composed countenances and
peaceful demeanour—went over to visit them. Upon seeing the tulasé neck beads
and neatly applied tilaka marks in the traditional twelve places upon the bodies
of Vijaya and Vrajanätha, the travelling Vaiñëavas offered respect and invited
Vijaya and Vrajanätha to join their serene gathering upon a welcoming outspread
blanket. To Vrajanätha’s question about their intentions, one of the Rämänandé
Bäbäjés replied, “Respected mahäräjas, we are on a pilgrimage to Ayodhyä and
along the way we have come to trace out Çré Navadvépa-dhäma, desiring to see the
sacred places of Çré Caitanya’s pastimes.” 

Vrajanätha said, “Well, you have already arrived in Navadvépa. For now have a
proper rest and then you may take darçana of Çré Yoga-péöha and of
Çréväsäìgana.” Expressing great joy, the Çré Vaiñëavas chanted a verse from the
Bhagavad Gétä, 15.6:

yad gatvä na nivartante
tad dhäma paramaà mama

“‘One who reaches my spiritual abode never returns to this material world
again.’

“Today we feel truly blessed, having had darçana of Çrédämä Mäyäpura, the
principal amongst all holy places.” 

Then they all sat together and discussed the sacred text Artha-païcaka, a small
book of extremely esoteric treatises from the Rämänuja sampradäya covering the
five principles: sva-svarüpa, the true identity of the jéva; para-svarüpa, the
identity of the Supreme Being; upäya-svarüpa, the process of attainment;
puruñärtha-svarüpa, the highest goal; and virodhé-svarüpa, the antithesis of
spiritual endeavour. Finally they delved into the three prime truths of the
Çré-sampradäya. At this point in the conversation, Vijaya-kumära enquired about
the views of the Çré-sampradäya upon näma-tattva, the principles of harinäma.

Talking together afterwards, Vijaya and Vrajanätha agreed that they were not
satisfied with the answers they had received. Vrajanätha commented, “Uncle, I
have pondered over this topic for quite some time and I have come to the
conclusion that taking the shelter of kåñëa-näma is the most beneficial and
auspicious practice for the jéva. The Lord of our hearts, Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, came into this sacred land of Mäyäpura-dhäma for the sole purpose of
propagating çuddha-kåñëa-näma. In fact, just yesterday, Çréla Gurudeva repeated
the point that of all the different limbs of bhakti, chanting çré-näma is the
most important. He urged us to properly realize näma-tattva. Let us go right
away this evening and learn from Gurudeva the esoteric science that is
çré-näma-tattva.”

More discussions followed and after making sure that their guests were well
taken care of Vijaya and Vrajanätha left for Çréväsäìgana at dusk, reaching
Çréväsäìgana whilst the evening äraté was still in progress. As usual the
Vaiñëavas assembled after the äraté in the courtyard under the bakula tree,
amongst them the venerable Çré Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé Mahäräja who was sitting
and chanting upon his tulasé beads. Vrajanätha and Vijaya-kumära approached
humbly and offered prostrate obeisances. Bäbäjé Mahäräja embraced them and told
them to sit comfortably, asking, “How is your progress in chanting and the
practice of bhakti?”

Vijaya-kumära replied with folded hands, “Benign Gurudeva, by your mercy
everything is auspicious for us. Please guide us in understanding the profound
significance of näma-tattva.”

The face of Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé immediately lit up with joy and he began to
speak, “There are two categories of harinäma: mukhya and gauëya. From the time
of the creation of the universe, those names of Kåñëa that are associated with
the material nature are gauëya-näma, secondary names, for example, såñöikartä,
creator; jagat-päla, the universal preserver; viçva-niyantä, the universal
administrator; viçva-pälaka, the universal maintainer; paramätmä, the Supersoul,
and so on. The word Brahman although free from the modes of material nature is
also a gauëya name. Though there are immense benefits from chanting these gauëya
names of Çré Kåñëa, they rarely bring forth transcendental results.

“On the other hand, the names of the Supreme Lord associated with His
transcendental spiritual abode are eternal and have nothing to do with the
mundane plane. These names are absolute, spiritual and known as mukhya-näma,
principal names, for example, Näräyaëa, Väsudeva, Janärdana, Håñékeça, Hari,
Acyuta, Govinda, Gopäla, Räma, and so on. The mukhya-näma are of the spiritual
sky and are non-different from the Supreme Lord Himself. The most fortunate
souls in this universe attract the attention of mukhya-näma with the purity of
their bhakti, and mukhya-näma dances upon their tongues in pristine glory.

“The mukhya-näma have no connection with this phenomenal plane and are endowed
with the complete çakti of Çré Bhagavän. They descend to this mundane illusory
sphere to annihilate mäyä. Therefore, the conditioned souls of this material
world have no better friend and well-wisher than harinäma. 

“The Båhan-näradéya Puräëa, 38.123, declares: 

harer näma harer näma
harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva
nästy eva gatir anyathä 

“‘Harinäma is my life and soul, harinäma is my life and soul, harinäma is my
life and soul. In Kali-yuga, there is no other way, there is no other way, there
is no other way to attain spiritual perfection other than the chanting of
harinäma.’

“Harinäma has wonderful unlimited power and uproots all the sins of the
conditioned souls burning in the great forest-fire of sinful life. The Garuòa
Puräëa, 1.232.12, states:

avaçenäpi yan-nämni
kértite sarva-pätakaiù
pumän vimucyate sadyaù
siàha-trastair mågair iva

“‘The ominous roar of a lion sends the deer scampering helter-skelter for their
lives. Similarly, harinäma instantaneously disperses and extirpates all sins
when chanted once, even unwittingly.’

“When one takes shelter of harinäma, one becomes free of all sufferings and
disease. The Skanda Puräëa states:

ädhayo vyädhayo yasya 
smaraëän-näma-kértanät
tadaiva vilayaà yänti 
tam anantaà namämy aham 

“‘I bow down in prayer before the eternal Supreme Lord, Çré Ananta Deva. Simply
by chanting and remembering His sacred name all mental and physical ailments are
instantly cured.’

“One who chants harinäma purifies his family, friends and the entire world. The
Brahmäëòa Puräëa states:

mahäpätaka yukto ‘pi 
kértayannaniçaà harim
çuddhäntaù karaëo bhütvä 
jäyate paëkti-pävanaù

“‘When even the most deleterious person engages in continuous chanting of
harinäma, the deepest core of his heart is cleansed, and soon he ranks amongst
the best of the twice-born brähmaëas.’

“One who is devoted to harinäma becomes free of all unhappiness, impediments and
disease. Båhad-viñëu Puräëa states:

sarva-rogopaçamaà 
sarvopadrava näçanam
çäntidaà sarväriñöänäà 
harer nämänu kértanam

“‘Constant chanting of harinäma is extremely beneficial and auspicious because
it destroys all diseases, distress and impediments.’

“The sinful degrading effect of Kali-yuga cannot trouble one who loudly chants
çré harinäma. The Båhad Näradéya Puräëa states:

hare keçava govinda 
väsudeva jaganmaya
itérayanti ye nityaà 
na hi tän vädhate kaliù

“‘Those persons who always glorify the names of the Lord in kértana, loudly
chanting, “Oh Hare! Oh Keçava! Oh Govinda! Oh Vasudeva! Oh Jaganmaya!” and so
on, are protected from the evil influence of Kali-yuga.’

“Simply by hearing çré harinäma, the residents of Hell become delivered. The
Nåsiàha Täpané states:

yathä yathä harer-näma 
kértayanti sma närakäù
tathä tathä harau bhakti
mudva hanto divaà yayuù

“‘In whatever hellish planets the condemned sinners are situated, simply by
chanting harinäma they attain bhakti and are promoted to the transcendental
abode of the Lord.’

“By loudly chanting çré harinäma, one destroys one’s prärabdha-karma, the
reactions to past päpa and puëya that are presently bearing fruit. The Çrémad
Bhägavatam, 12.3.44, states:

yan-nämadheyaà mriyamäëa äturaù
patan skhalan vä vivaço gåëan pumän
vimukta-karmärgala uttamäà gatià
präpnoti yakñyanti na taà kalau janäù

“‘Çré harinäma is glorious! Chanted in any condition of life, whether almost
dead, deathly sick, slipping, falling, or in any semi-conscious state, the name
of Çré Bhagavän releases the chanting person from the bondage of karmic
reactions and promotes him to the highest goal of spiritual achievement. The
real pity is that the fallen people of Kali-yuga refuse to execute this
devotional activity.’

“Harinäma kértana is more glorious and beneficial than studying all the Vedas.
The Skanda Puräëa further states:

mä åco mä yajus täta 
mä säma paöha kiïcana
govindeti harer-näma 
geyaà gäyasva nityaçaù

“‘O respected sage! It is unnecessary to study at length the Åg Veda, Yajur
Veda, Säma Veda and Atharva Veda. The prime necessity, however, is to perform
saìkértana of the names of Çré Hari, such as Govinda and so on. Just constantly
perform this activity.’

“Chanting çré-harinäma is better than pilgrimage to all the térthas, holy
places. The Vämana Puräëa states:

tértha-koöi-sahasräëi
tértha-koöi-çatäni ca
täni sarväëy aväpnoti 
viñëor-nämäni kértanät

“‘The spiritual result accrued from millions of holy pilgrimages to sacred
places is easily and fully obtained simply by performing kértana of the names of
Çré Viñëu.’

“Even chanting hari-nämäbhäsa, a semblance of harinäma, gives infinitely more
results than performing all kinds of material piety. The Skanda Puräëa further
states:

go-koöi-dänaà grahaëe khagasya
prayäga-gaìgodaka-kalpa-väsaù
yajïäyutaà meru-suvarëa-dänaà
govinda-kérter na samaà çatäàçaiù 

“‘Admirable religious activities such as giving ten million cows in charity on
the occasions of solar or lunar eclipses, living in holy places upon the banks
of the Gaìgä or at Prayäga, for as long as four yugas, conducting countless
sacrifices, and donating gold in quantities exceeding the weight of Mount Meru
are equivalent to a mere fraction of the result that is obtained by performing
kértana of the names of Govinda.’

“Harinäma can bestow all kinds of artha, benefit. The Skanda Puräëa states:

etat ñaò-varga-haraëaà ripu-nigrahaëaà param
adhyätma-mülam etad dhi viñëor-nämänu kértanam

“‘Incessant kértana of names of Çré Viñëu is the only means to conquer the six
senses and stop the cycle of birth and death in material existence. Harinäma is
the root of all spiritual knowledge and the destroyer of the six enemies of the
mind: lust, anger, greed, bewilderment, intoxication and envy.’

“Çré Harinäma has all çakti. The Skanda Puräëa further states:

däna-vrata-tapas-tértha-kñeträdénaï ca yäh sthitäù
çaktayo deva mahatäà sarva-päpaharäù ñubhäù
räjasüyäçvamedhänäï jïana-sädhyätma-vastunaù
äkåñya hariëä sarväù sthäpitä sveñu nämasu

“‘The devas have the power to destroy sins and shower boons and benedictions.
Pious activities such as charity, penances, vows, pilgrimage, räjasüya and
açvamedha sacrifices, transcendental knowledge, and so on, possess wonderful
power. However, the Supreme Lord, Çré Hari, has collected together all these
powers and infused them into His transcendental names.’

“Çré-harinäma gives bliss to the entire world. In the Bhagavad-gétä, 11.36:

sthäne håñékeça tava prakértyä
jagat prahåñyaty anurajyate ca 

“‘O Håñékeça, the world becomes joyful upon hearing Your name and thus everyone
becomes attached to You.’

“One who chants harinäma is worshipable to the entire world. The Båhan-näradéya
Puräëa states:

näräyaëa jagannätha väsudeva janärdana
itérayanti ye nityaà te vai sarvatra vanditäù

“‘Those fortunate souls who always perform harinäma kértana, loudly chanting,
“Oh Näräyaëa, Oh Jagannätha, Oh Vasudeva, Oh Janärdana,” and so on, are worthy
of being worshipped by the entire universe.’

“Çré-harinäma is the shelter of those who have no other shelter. The Padma
Puräëa states:

ananya-gatayo martyä bhogino ‘pi parantapäù
jïäna-vairägya-rahitä brahmacaryädi-varjitäù
sarva-dharmojjhitäù viñëor näma-mätraika-jalpakäù
sukhena yäà gatià yänti na taà sarve ‘pi dhärmikaù

“‘Gross licentious materialists, men of violence, bereft of wisdom and
renunciation, promiscuous libertines who neglect all religious rules and
etiquettes have but one hope to be saved. By chanting the names of Çré Viñëu,
they are not only saved but obtain spiritual merits beyond the reach of all the
most religious and pious souls.’

“One may chant harinäma at all times and in all circumstances. The
Viñëu-dharmottara states:

na deça-niyamas tasmin na käla-niyamas tathä
nocchiñöädau niñedho ‘sti çré-harer nämni lubdhaka

“‘Those elevated souls who are eager to chant harinäma are not subject to any
restrictions upon their chanting in regard to any time, place or circumstance.’

“One desirous of mukti may have this desire fulfilled easily by chanting
harinäma. The Varäha Puräëa states:

näräyaëäcyutänanta-väsudeveti yo naraù
satataà kértayed-bhuvi yäti mallayatäm sa hi

“‘The Supreme Lord said, “Those great souls who wander the earth and always
engage in incessant chanting of the transcendental names of Näräyaëa, Acyuta,
Ananta, Väsudeva, and so on, are eternally connected with Me in pure devotion
and reach My abode.’

“Similarly, the Garuòa Puräëa states:

kià kariñyati säìkhyena kià yogair nara-näyaka
muktim icchasi räjendra kuru govinda-kértanam

“‘O chief among men! What is the use of studying säìkhya philosophy or
practising añöäìga-yoga? O most powerful of kings! If you desire mukti, then
simply be engrossed in chanting the transcendental names of Govinda.’

“Chanting harinäma enables the jévas to easily attain Vaikuëöha. The Nandé
Puräëa states:

sarvatra sarva-käleñu ye’pi kurvanti pätakam
näma-saìkértanaà-kåtvä yänti viñëoù paraà padam

“‘Even a person who is mired in the morass of the most heinous sins committed
throughout all time and place can acquire the highest possible destination,
shelter the lotus feet of Çré Viñëu, by continuously performing
näma-saìkértana.’

“Chanting harinäma is the topmost way of pleasing Çré Bhagavän. The
Båhan-näradéya Puräëa states:

näma-saìkirtanaà viñëoù kñut-öåö-prapéòitädiñu
karoti satataà vipräs tasya préto hy adhokñajaù

“‘Dear brähmaëas! Çré Viñëu is the transcendental Lord beyond the range of
mundane sense perception. Any soul who continues to perform saìkirtanaà of His
names in spite of being assailed by hunger, thirst and other distresses is
surely successful in securing His pleasure and affection.’

“Harinäma has the potency to control Çré Bhagavän. The Mahäbhärata states:

åëam etat pravåddhaà me hådayäì näsarpati
yad-govindeti cukroça kåñëä mäà düra-väsinam

“‘Draupadé has called out My name, “Hey Govinda!” in distress with great
feelings of separation from Me who was far away. For this reason, I am
completely indebted to her. And this debt has multiplied to such an extent that
I am unable to forget it even today.’

“Harinäma is the puruñärtha, supreme goal, for the jéva. The Skanda Puräëa and
the Padma Puräëa state:

idam eva hi mäìgalyam etad eva dhanärjanam
jévitasya phalaï caitad yad dämodara-kértanam

“‘Kértana of the name of the Lord Çré Dämodara evokes real auspiciousness, is
the only eternal treasure, and is the only success and aim of human life.’

“Çré-harinäma-kértana is the most potent of all categories of bhakti-sädhana.
The Vaiñëava-cintämaëi states:

agha-cchit smaraëaà viñëor
bahv-äyäsena sädhyate
oñöha-spandana-mätreëa
kértanaà tu tato varamv

“‘Although capable of destroying all sins, the remembrance of Çré Viñëu is
achieved only with extraordinary effort. On the other hand, simply by moving
one’s lips one may perform kåñëa-kértana and achieve the same success, and thus
this process is superior.’

“The Viñëu-rahasya states:

yad-abhyarcya harià bhaktyä kåte kratu-çatair api
phalaà präpnoty avikalaà kalau govinda-kértanam

“‘The spiritual benefit a person accrues by devoutly worshiping the Deity form
of the Supreme Lord and by performing thousands of sacrifices in Satya-yuga is
easily acquired in Kali-yuga simply by performing kértana of the names of Çré
Govinda.’

“The Çrémad Bhägavatam, 12.3.52, states: 

kåte yad dhyäyato viñëuà
tretäyäà yajato makhaiù
dväpare paricaryäyäà
kalau tad dhari-kértanät

“‘The supreme goal of human life was achieved in Satya-yuga through meditation
upon Çré Viñëu, in Tretä-yuga through the performance of elaborate sacrifices,
in Dväpara-yuga through dedicated temple worship, and in Kali-yuga the very same
is attained through kértana of the transcendental names of Çré Kåñëa.’

“Vijaya! Just stop for a moment to consider that even nämäbhäsa is superior to
all varieties of sat-karma, pious activities. Pious activities are primarily
just a means to an end—material happiness. After their results have been offered
and enjoyed, such pious works are depleted and become defunct. Further, in any
circumstance, such sat-karma is entirely materialistic, whereas chanting
kåñëa-näma is a one hundred percent transcendental, spiritual activity. Thus,
kåñëa-näma is simultaneously the most efficacious means for self-realization and
at the time when the spiritual benefits of this practice mature kåñëa-näma is
realized as the very goal, the Supreme Lord Çré Kåñëa Himself. Another vital
point is that all the different limbs of bhakti are anchored in the chanting of
kåñëa-näma.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I understand that harinäma is transcendental, however, to
accept without a trace of doubt that harinäma is in fact absolutely
transcendental even though the names are composed of apparently material sounds
and syllables, then I must first realize how this is so. Kindly enlighten me on
this aspect.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Padma Puräëa states:

näma cintämaëiù kåñëaç
caitanya-rasa-vigrahaù
pürëaù çuddho nitya-mukto
’bhinnatvän näma-näminoù

“Kåñëa-näma is transcendentally blissful and bestows all spiritual benediction,
for kåñëa-näma is Kåñëa Himself, the reservoir of all pleasure. Kåñëa-näma is
complete and the form of all transcendental rasa. Kåñëa-näma is not a material
name under any condition and no less powerful than Kåñëa Himself. Since
kåñëa-näma is transcendental to any material quality, there is no question of
kåñëa-näma being involved with mäyä. Kåñëa-näma is always liberated and
spiritual, never conditioned by the laws of material nature, because kåñëa-näma
and Kåñëa Himself are identical.” 

Vijaya, “How can the sound vibration of kåñëa-näma be different from mundane
sounds? How can it be supramundane?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Kåñëa-näma is not a product of this material universe.
When the eternal spiritual spark, the jéva, attains his svarüpa in the
transcendental realm, he is eligible to pronounce çuddha-kåñëa-näma. Now in his
present condition—under the enslavement of mäyä and covered with the gross
material senses—the jéva is unqualified to utter çuddha-kåñëa-näma. Nonetheless,
by the unconditional mercy of hlädiné sakti Çrématé Rädhäräëé, when the svarüpa
of the purified jéva begins to emerge, then çuddha-kåñëa-näma automatically
begins to manifest. Within the fertile field of purified consciousness,
çuddha-kåñëa-näma appears and dances upon the devotionally enlivened tongue of
the devotee by the infinite compassion of Çré Kåñëa Himself. Kåñëa-näma does not
possess a mundane form in the shape of material sounds and syllables, but
possesses a saccidänanda form of eternal transcendental bliss and knowledge.
When kåñëa-näma gambols upon the tongue of the çuddha-bhakta, He may appear to
be material sounds and syllables to those whose consciousness is covered by
mäyä, however He is always pure and transcendental. This is the esoteric mystery
which surrounds kåñëa-näma.”

Vijaya, “Which is the sweetest amongst the principal names?” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Çata-näma-stotra states:

viñëor-ekaikaà nämäpi sarva-vedädhikaà matam
tädåk-näma-sahasreëa räma-näma-samaà småtam

“‘One name of Çré Viñëu is superior to all the Vedic mantras, and one name of
Çré Räma is more potent than a thousand names of Çré Viñëu.’

“Then, the Brahmäëòa Puräëa states:

sahasra-nämnäà puëyänäà
trir ävåttyä tu yat phalam
ekävåttyä tu kåñëasya
nämaikaà tat prayacchati 

“‘When the thousand transcendental names of Çré Viñëu are chanted three times,
they are equivalent to chanting one name of Kåñëa.’

“Thus, we see that ‘Kåñëa’ is the supreme name, therefore we should always
follow the instruction of Çré Gauräìga and chant the mahä-mantra: Hare Kåñëa
Hare Kåñëa Kåñëa Hare Hare Hare Räma Hare Räma Räma Räma Hare Hare.”

Vijaya, “What is the process of harinäma-sädhana?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “One must chant harinäma upon a set of tulasé beads, but
if beads are not available, one may count upon the fingers. In any case, one
must chant kåñëa-näma continuously without committing offences. The final
benediction of chanting purely is kåñëa-prema. The reason for chanting upon
beads or counting upon one’s fingers is to ensure reaching a fixed number of
kåñëa-näma and to note whether one’s chanting is increasing or not. Tulasé devé
is very dear to the Supreme Lord, therefore chanting harinäma in contact with
her in the form of tulasé beads enhances one’s feeling and attachment for
harinäma. While one is chanting, one should always remember that Kåñëa and
kåñëa-näma are identical.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, there are nine limbs of bhakti practice, which are further
sub-divided into sixty-four items. Chanting harinäma is one of them. If we shall
chant incessantly, where is the time to execute any of the other limbs?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé: “The proposal to chant incessantly does not present a
contradiction, for the sixty-four divisions are included within the nine limbs
of bhakti. These nine organs of bhakti can be executed in any form, through
Deity worship in the temple, or by chanting in solitude, or by chanting in the
association of elevated devotees. To hear, chant, remember, serve, and so on, in
the presence of the Deities is factually in the category of chanting harinäma.
When one is unable to chant before the Deities, one may recollect the Deities
within one’s mind and then hear, chant, remember, and serve the Deities. In this
way, one may execute all the nine processes of bhakti within the mind in the
form of chanting harinäma. Those who are fortunate by the blessings of the Lord
have a special ruci for constant chanting. Automatically, they are
simultaneously engaged in all the nine branches of bhakti. Certainly chanting
harinäma is the most potent of all the nine limbs. Therefore, when the devotee
chants in full ecstasy, even though none of the other limbs are apparently
visible actually there is nothing lacking.”

Vijaya, “What does it mean to chant incessantly?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “To chant incessantly means to be engaged in chanting
harinäma at all times, even whilst eating, walking, bathing and performing all
the regular physical duties—the only exception is sleep. There are no
restrictions for chanting according to time, place, or circumstance; one may be
in a pure or impure condition.”

Vijaya, “Alas Gurudeva! We dare not call ourselves Vaiñëavas until we receive
your blessings, which will then empower us to chant harinäma continuously.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Just recall everything that I have said regarding the
three different categories of Vaiñëavas. The dearest Lord of our heart Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu taught Satyaräja Khän that a Vaiñëava is he who chants
çuddha-kåñëa-näma with sincere faith, even if not incessantly; a vaiñëava-tara,
an elevated Vaiñëava, is he who utters çuddha-kåñëa-näma incessantly; and the
vaiñëava-tama, the best of Vaiñëavas, is he who, just by being seen, inspires
others to chant kåñëa-näma. By chanting kåñëa-näma with faith one becomes a true
Vaisnava.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly tell us whatever else we should know about çuddha-kåñëa-näma to
attain pure chanting.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Çuddha-kåñëa-näma may be attained only when çraddhä
fully matures into ananya-bhakti, single-minded devotion. Any chanting at a
level lower than ananya-bhakti is either nämäbhäsa, the semblance of kåñëa-näma,
or nämäparädha, offensive chanting of kåñëa-näma.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, should harinäma be considered the sädhya or the sädhana?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “When harinäma is chanted at the stage of
sädhana-bhakti, then He may be considered the sädhana. Yet, when harinäma is
chanted at the stage of bhäva-bhakti and prema-bhakti, then harinäma is indeed
realized as the sädhya-vastu, the supreme goal of spiritual attainment.
Çuddha-kåñëa-näma manifests in degrees proportionate to the intensity of
çuddha-bhakti of the chanter.”

Vijaya, “Are there any distinctions between kåñëa-näma and kåñëa-svarüpa?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The answer is negative, there are no differences
whatsoever. However, there is one unique, even mystical feature in this subject:
Harinäma is more merciful than kåñëa-svarüpa. Offences committed against
kåñëa-svarüpa are never forgiven by Kåñëa; however, offences against both
kåñëa-svarüpa and kåñëa-näma are both very kindly absolved by the mercy of
harinäma. Therefore, one should understand and commit to memory the ten offences
to harinäma. Then, one must meticulously avoid perpetrating these offences,
because one must rise above nämäparädha in order to chant çuddha-harinäma.
Remind me tomorrow to discuss nämäparädha, the offences to harinäma.”

Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha fell at the feet of their beloved spiritual master
and requested permission to leave. They smeared the sacred dust of his feet upon
their heads and departed. Walking home slowly, they were deep in thought about
the glories and purely spiritual identity of çré-harinäma.

Thus ends the twenty-third chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma:
Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana, Part Eleven: The Initial Discussion of
Näma-tattva

JDH 24: Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Chapter Twenty-four
Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Part Twelve: Elucidation of Nämäparädha, Offences against Harinäma

That night, Vijaya and Vrajanätha chanted harinäma with pure çraddhä fifty
thousand times upon their tulasé beads. The following morning they felt greatly
exhilarated, feeling that by the mercy of Çré Kåñëa they had been able to chant
purely. Then, in a blissful discussion, they exchanged personal observations
about their experience in chanting. Their day was quickly devoured by a mixture
of such devotional activities, beginning with a dip in the Gaìgä, Deity worship,
chanting harinäma, studying the philosophy of the Däsa-müla-çikñä, discussing
Çrémad Bhägavatam, serving the Vaiñëavas, honouring kåñëa-prasädam, and so on.
When evening approached, they left for Çréväsäìgana in Mäyäpura. 

Entering the bhajana-kuöéra of Çré Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, they offered their
prostrated obeisances. Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé spoke softly with his usual air of
composed joy. He said, “Just as chanting is the highest devotional principle,
similarly its antipode is nämäparädha, more serious than all other sinful
activities and offences. The Padma Puräëa, Svarga-käëòa, 48-49, states when
describing harinäma:

nämäparädha-yuktänäà
nämäny eva haranty agham
aviçränti-prayuktäni
täny evärtha-karäëi ca 

“‘Only incessant chanting of harinäma can effect the purification of one who is
infected with nämäparädha. Indeed, the incessant chanting of harinäma is the
only way to achieve the prayojana of human life, kåñëa-prema.’

“Take heed that counteracting nämäparädha is troublesome; therefore, intelligent
persons will carefully avoid committing nämäparädha at all. Pinpoint the sources
of nämäparädha, overcome them diligently, then çuddha-harinäma will soon begin
to manifest. A faithful devotee is moved to açru, tears of happiness, and
pulaka, horripilation, whilst chanting purely, but an undercurrent of
nämäparädha in one’s character will disqualify one from achieving such ecstatic
chanting of çuddha-näma. Therefore, the practitioner must be awake to and most
cautious about nämäparädha.” 

Vijaya, “Çréla Gurudeva, what are the symptoms of çuddha-näma?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Chanting without a trace of nämäparädha is çuddha-näma.
Perfect or imperfect pronunciation of the harinäma is not the criterion for
chanting purely. Study this injunction from the Padma Puräëa, Svarga-käëòa,
48.90:

nämaikaà yasya väci smaraëa-patha-gataà çrotra-mülaà gataà vä
 çuddhaà väçuddha-varëaà vyavahita-rahitaà tärayaty eva satyam
tac ced deha-draviëa-janatä-lobha-päñaëòa-madhye
 nikñiptaà syän na phala-janakaà çéghram evätra vipra 

“‘If a devotee just once utters harinäma purely, or if just one çuddha-näma
enters the path of the devotee’s mind or ear, then that one çuddha-näma will
certainly deliver the devotee from material bondage, whether vibrated properly
or improperly, with correct or incorrect grammar, vibrated in separate parts, or
properly conjoined. O brähmaëa, the potency of çuddha-harinäma is certainly
great. However, if one uses the vibration of harinäma to achieve health, wealth,
sons, and an opulent residence, or chants under greed for läbha, distinction;
püjä, adoration; and pratiñöhä, position—in other words, if one utters harinäma
with offence—such chanting will not produce the eternal transcendental result
very soon. Therefore, one should diligently avoid offences in chanting çré
harinäma.’

“The chanting of harinäma may be spoilt in two ways: sämänya, exiguously; or
båhat, enormously. Chanting with ordinary exiguous fault is called nämäbhäsa,
and the results of chanting are delayed. Impure chanting with enormous fault is
nämäparädha; in this condition only constant and intensive chanting for a
protracted period can remove the enormous fault.”

Vijaya, “The duty of the sädhaka is clear to me now, but a deep understanding of
the principles of nämäparädha is needed. Kindly detail the nämäparädhas.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The ten nämäparädhas are lucidly enumerated in the
Padma Puräëa:

“The first offence is described:

atäà nindä nämnaù paramam aparädhaà vitanute
yataù khyätià yätaà katham u sahate tad-vigarhäm

“‘To blaspheme the sädhu is a very serious offence. Saintly devotees are
attached to chanting harinäma and propagating His glories all over the universe.
Therefore, why would harinäma tolerate any offence against the sädhu?’

“The second offence is described:

çivasya çré-viñëor ya iha guëa-nämädi-sakalaà
dhiyä bhinnaà paçyet sa khalu hari-nämähita-karaù

“‘It is an offence to consider the most auspicious names, beauty, qualities,
pastimes of the Supreme Lord, Çré Viñëu, as mundane and different from Him. It
is also offensive to equate devas like Lord Çiva with the Supreme Godhead, Çré
Viñëu, or think that they are independent of the control of Çré Viñëu.’

“The third offence is described:

guror avajïä

“‘A person must never harbour the misconception that the guru who is realized in
the glories of harinäma is an ordinary mortal.’ 

“The fourth offence is described:

çruti-çästra-nindanam

“‘To blaspheme the Vedic literature and its corollaries.’

“The fifth offence is described:

tatha-artha-vädaù

“‘To think that the glories of harinäma are imaginary or exaggerated is
offensive.’

“The sixth offence is described:

hari-nämni kalpanam

“‘To consider that harinäma are fictitious names of the Éçvara is also
offensive.’

“The seventh offence is described:

nämno baläd yasya hi päpa-buddhir
na vidyate tasya yamair hi çuddhiù 

“‘Those who commit sin relying on the purifying power of chanting harinäma to
overcome the negative reactions are the most egregious offenders; no amount of
penances, yoga, or dhyäna, etc., can absolve their offence.’

“The eighth offence is described:

dharma-vrata-tyäga-hutädi-sarva-
çubha-kriyä-sämyam api pramädaù 

“‘Religious vows, penances, renunciation, and homa fire-sacrifices are indeed
pious activities. However, they are mundane activities; hence, it is an offence
to compare them to the transcendental activity of chanting supramundane çré
harinäma.’

“The ninth offence is described:

açraddadhäne vimukhe ’py açåëvati
yaç copadeçaù çiva-nämäparädhaù 

“‘To instruct a faithless person about the glories of çré harinäma is an
offence.’

“The tenth offence is described:

çrute ’pi näma-mähätmye yaù préti-rahito naraù
ahaà-mamädi-paramo nämni so ’py aparädha-kåt

“‘Those persons who even after hearing repeatedly about the wonderful and
transcendental qualities of çré harinäma still maintain material attachments and
think in terms of ‘me’ and ‘mine’ are gross offenders.’”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, kindly elucidate the individual nämäparädhas.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Let us begin with the first offence. Those
çuddha-bhaktas who have exclusively surrendered to harinäma have also given up
every material aspiration, such as the fruits of karma, dharma, jïäna, tapasya,
añöäìga-yoga, etc. Therefore, to enviously criticize them is a greatly harmful
offence. Harinäma cannot tolerate any blasphemy against them, because they are
engaged in propagating the transcendental teachings and factual glories of
harinäma. Therefore, one must desist from being critical of the sädhus who are
the guardians of harinäma and recognize their elevated status. One should join
them in Çré Mahäprabhu’s movement of harinäma-saìkértana and thereby
instantaneously attract the mercy of harinäma.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, we have understood the significance of the first nämäparädha.
Kindly explain the second offence.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “There are two different explanations of the second
offence. Intellectual hair-splitting of the relative significance of the names
and qualities of Çré Sadäçiva, the foremost of the devas, and Çré Viñëu, the
Supreme Lord, and considering these personalities to be independent of each
other, or thinking that they are competing with each other as the Supreme Éçvara
is an offence. Such an intellectual posture is tantamount to polytheism, and
therefore a great hindrance in the growth of unalloyed hari-bhakti. Thus, one
must chant harinäma with the realization that Çré Kåñëa is the Supreme Éçvara of
all the devas, including Çré Sadäçiva, who receive their powers from Him and are
thus certainly not independent of His control.

“The other explanation is that the svarüpa of harinäma is çivasya, the
all-auspicious embodiment of all the çaktis of Çré Kåñëa, absolutely
nondifferent from the fountainhead svarüpa of Çré Kåñëa; therefore, to see
harinäma, and indeed the innumerable forms, qualities, and pastimes of Çré Kåñëa
as distinct from the svarüpa of Çré Kåñëa is a heinous offence. The name, form,
qualities, and pastimes of Çré Kåñëa are intrinsic to the very svarüpa of Çré
Kåñëa Himself and are all one hundred percent transcendental and nondifferent.
Anyone who does not comprehend this esoteric tattva suffers from gross
misconceptions that should be first overcome with exact sambandha-jïäna before
entering the path of chanting kåñëa-näma.” 

Vijaya, “To grasp the first two offences was not difficult for us, because you
have earlier discussed the transcendental personality of Çré Kåñëa, and the
simultaneous oneness and difference of His name, form, qualities, and pastimes
with His svarüpa. Kindly explain to us the third offence involving guru-tattva.”


Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The teacher who delineates the highest and the most
esoteric tattva of harinäma is the true näma-guru, the spiritual master who
initiates the disciple into the chanting of harinäma. To develop unflinching
faith in the näma-guru is obligatory for the disciple. A person who because of
misinterpretation of tattva believes that the näma-guru is only conversant with
scriptures dealing with harinäma and is therefore not well versed in the wider
conclusions of Vedänta philosophy commits a serious offence against harinäma.
The guru realized in the tattva of harinäma is truly the best of all spiritual
preceptors and must never be minimised.”

Vijaya, “O Gurudeva, if we are purely devoted to you, only then will our lives
be auspicious. Please be merciful and explain the fourth offence.” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Whenever profound spiritual tattva is discussed in the
çästra, the tattva concerning harinäma is always placed on the highest pedestal.
The following quotations from the Åg Veda, 1.156.3, which are quoted in the Hari
bhakti-viläsa, 11.274-276, are self-explanatory: 

auà äsya jänanto näma-cid-viviktanas
mahas te viñëo sumatià bhajämahe
auà tat sat

“‘O Supreme Lord, Çré Viñëu! Your sacred näma is absolutely cognizant and
all-illuminating because the entire Vedic scriptures have emanated from Him.
Your näma is the wellspring of supreme bliss, the embodiment of Brahman, is
readily available, and is full of transcendental knowledge. We meditate upon the
purport of Your näma, discuss näma amongst ourselves, and chant Your näma
continuously. In this way, we worship you.’

oà padaà devasya namasä vyantaù
çravasya vaçrava ännamåktam
nämäni cid dadhire yajïiyäni
bhadräyante raëayantaù saëdåñtau

“‘O Çré Viñëu, ever since our faith in You has become steadfast, our desire to
gain Your direct audience has led us to offer incessant prayers at Your lotus
feet, which are the purifying agents of the hearts of the devotees and replete
with relishable transcendental pastimes. We always hear the glorification of
Your unsurpassable qualities and praise them amongst ourselves. In this way, we
have taken shelter of Your omnipotent and all-purifying näma.’

auà tam u stotäraù pürvaà yathävida
åtasya garvabhaà januñä pipartana
äsya jänanto näma cid-viviktana
mahas te viñëu sumatià bhajämahe

“‘O sages! Know for certain that the original primeval Supreme Personality you
seek is Çré Kåñëa. Worship Him in this realization, for He is the ultimate goal
of the Vedas, the absolute essence. He is the embodiment of eternity, absolute
knowledge and divine bliss. The purpose of human life is to know Him, to
describe Him and the wonderful pastimes of His incarnations. Let us eulogize and
worship that Supreme Lord according to our natural spiritual emotions and taste.
In this way, we shall crown our lives with paramount success and continuously
chant harinäma, which is dynamic, variegated and omnipotent. To chant harinäma
is the most relishable activity and the bestower of the greatest pleasure.’

“Thus, we find the Vedas and Upaniñads praising çré harinäma and His
incomparable potencies; hence, the fourth offence is to castigate or minimise
the çruti scriptures. Through immense misfortune, some foolish persons give much
weight to the innumerable instructions from various çrutis, yet neglect those
particular çrutis that establish the supreme position of harinäma and the
chanting harinäma as the most essential spiritual activity. This is very
offensive and because of this serious error one fails to imbibe the proper
çraddhä and attachment for harinäma. One must comprehend that these çrutis and
their teachings are the actual essence of Vedic knowledge, only then can one
sincerely chant harinäma.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, your words are cascades of ambrosia, kindly proceed to the
fifth offence.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “To think that the qualities of harinäma described in
the scriptures are either imaginary or exaggerated is a serious nämäparädha.
This mundane line of thinking is condemned in the scriptures, as for example in
the Jaimini Saàhitä:

çruti småti-puräëesu näma-mähätmya-väcisu
ye ‘rthaväda iti brüyur na teñäm niraya-kñayaù 

“‘Persons who disrespect the çrutis, småtis, and puräëas, which wonderfully
glorify harinäma, with the speculative assertion that the glorification of
harinäma within such scriptures is mere exaggeration are hurled down to the
hellish planet known as Akñaya, the Inexhaustible Hell.’

“The Supreme Lord instructs Çré Brahmä in the Çré Brahma-saàhitä, saying:

yan-näma-kértana-phalaà vividhaà niçamya 
na çraddadhäti manute yad utärthavädam
yo mänuñas tam iha dukùa-caye kñipämi
saàsära-ghora-vividhärti nipéòitäëgam

“‘That person who even after hearing about the wonderful results of chanting
harinäma refuses to develop sincere çraddhä in harinäma and, on the contrary,
expostulates that such elucidations of the potency of harinäma are inflated
panegyrics is hurled by Me into the deep gloom of material nescience after being
dragged through excruciating suffering.’

“The scriptures have unanimously declared that harinäma is invested with the
full potency of the Lord. Harinäma is absolutely transcendental and possesses
the power to dissolve the illusion of the entire material creation at will.
According to the Viñëu-dharma Puräëa:

kåñëeti mangalaà näma yasya väci pravarttate
bhasmé-bhavanti-räjendra mahäpätaka-koöayaù 

“‘O mighty monarch! Those who utter ‘Kåñëa’ and other munificent names of the
Supreme Lord destroy the millions of reprehensible sins they may have
committed.’

“The Båhan-näradéya Puräëa states:

nänyat paçyämi jantünäà-vihäya hari-kértanam 
sarva-päpa-praçamanaà präyascittaà dvijottama

“‘O best of the brähmaëas, chanting harinäma is the atonement that destroys all
sins, and I consider one who gives up chanting harinäma to be no more than an
animal.’

“The Båhad-viñëu Puräëa states:

nämno hi yävaté çaktiù päpa-nirharaëe hareù
tävat kartuà na çaknoti pätaka pätaké naraù

“‘Harinäma possesses such incredible powers of purifying any sin that even the
most sinful person is unable to commit so many sins that harinäma cannot
absolve.’ 

“These scriptural quotes give only a partial impression of the uniqueness of çré
harinäma. Karmis and jïänés greedy for pecuniary profits by protecting the
prestige of their own misguided endeavours deceive people by saying that these
scriptural statements are fictitious and pompous. They say that such praises are
heaped upon harinäma in order to motivate people to chant and that in reality
these praises are nothing more than exaggerated falsities. How can such ignorant
offenders ever cultivate taste in chanting harinäma?

“Therefore, one’s chanting of harinäma must be strengthened by çraddhä in the
scriptural injunctions and glorifications. Simultaneously, association with
offenders to harinäma must be strictly avoided. Çré Mahäprabhu has given the
advice that a devotee who has even just accidentally met such an offender to
harinäma has to cleanse himself by bathing immediately in a holy river whilst
still in his clothes.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, it appears that a gåhastha has to struggle to chant harinäma
purely; he is mostly surrounded by non-devotees and offenders. And furthermore
as brähmaëa paëòitas to find saintly association is difficult for us in
particular. O merciful master, if you bless us, we can find the strength to
denounce bad, atheistic association. The more we hear from you, the greater is
our desire to hear more. Now kindly explain the sixth offence.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The sixth nämäparädha is to consider kåñëa-näma as an
imaginary and fictitious proposition. The mäyävädé speculators and gross
materialists conclude that Brahman, the Supreme Absolute Truth, is impersonal,
formless, and nameless. They speculate that names such as Räma, Kåñëa, and so
on, are fabricated by the sages and given to Brahman only to accomplish a
specific purpose. When such purpose has been achieved, the names are no longer
necessary. This is the opinion of harinäma given by these demoniac offenders.

“Kåñëa-näma is eternal and transcendental and descends from the supramundane
plane to appear through the spiritualized senses of a faithful chanter purified
by hari-bhakti-sädhana. Aspiring sädhakas must receive proper instructions from
the çästras and their näma-gurus about the absolute divinity of harinäma and
then chant sincerely. Otherwise, they will be disqualified from receiving
näma-kåpä, mercy from çré kåñëa-näma.”

Vijaya, “Çréla Bäbäjé, before we found the safe sanctuary of your lotus feet, we
were contaminated by the bad association of materialists and shrewd,
sophisticated rhetoricians. By your kind blessings, all that is past history.
What is the seventh nämäparädha?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Another terrible nämäparädha is to commit sinful acts
relying on the purifying power of chanting harinäma to absolve one of the future
negative karmic reactions. Such a motivated offence cannot be absolved by the
yogic process of yama, niyama, etc., nor by präyaçcitta, atonement, and so on.
This offence and the sins committed in connection to this offence can be
purified by the mercy of harinäma alone, because they all fall within the sphere
of nämäparädha.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, if every kind of sin is destroyed by harinäma, how is it
possible that those who chant harinäma commit offences against Him?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “My son, the moment the jéva achieves the shelter of
çuddha-näma, one utterance of ‘Kåñëa’ is enough to extirpate all sins, both
prärabdha and aprärabdha. Thereafter, by the chanting of çuddha-näma the jéva
reaps prema. Immersed in prema, one who chants çuddha-näma has no affinity for
päpa and is repelled at the very thought of performing even puëyä. In addition,
he is not in the least attracted even to mukti. Where then is the question of
his committing sins?

“However, as far as the chanting of the sädhaka is concerned, it is still on the
level of nämäbhäsa because aparädha still lingers faintly within his
consciousness. However, even nämäbhäsa chanting gradually eradicates all
prärabdha and aprärabdha sinful reactions and elicits disgust at committing
further sins. If by chance some sin is accidentally committed, the nämäbhäsa
chanting also destroys that. However, if the devotee tries to exploit this
sin-eradicating potential of harinäma by carrying out further sinful activities
premeditatedly or out of sheer nonchalance, thinking that the chanting will
certainly vindicate him from his sins, then his sins escalate into serious
nämäparädha.”

Vijaya, “Dear Gurudeva, now kindly explain the eighth offence and thus increase
our happiness.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “To understand the eighth nämäparädha one must
discriminate between pious activities and devotional service. Sat-karma
comprises the naimittika-dharma of varëäsrama; giving in charity; observing
religious vows; performing philanthropic works; renouncing everything, including
the fruits of one’s labour; conducting religious sacrifices; practising
añöäìga-yoga; and so on. In addition, all other materially pious deeds as
prescribed in the çästras are within the purview of mundane dharma, known as
jaòa-dharma. They are not spiritual. In contrast, chanting çré kåñëa-näma is a
supramundane, purely spiritual activity.

“Sat-karma activities are only an upäya, a means to an end. Sat-karma activities
hold up the illusory promise of material bliss as the ultimate goal, but are
only a means and not the final goal. Chanting harinäma is different. At the
beginning stage of sädhana-bhakti, chanting harinäma is indeed the dynamic
sädhana. However, at the culmination of one’s spiritual endeavour the chanting
is transformed from the sädhana into the very sädhya sought by the earlier
practice. Therefore, chanting harinäma must not be compared to any material
activity—pious, religious, or otherwise. Those who do not accept this view are
offenders against harinäma. Those who believe that chanting harinäma achieves
the same transient mediocre results as sat-karma commit aparädha against
harinäma by equating altruistic performances with the chanting of harinäma.

“You must clearly understand the distinction between material and spiritual
activity and their respective results. Abhidheya-jïäna directs that chanting
harinäma is transcendental, and that the path of mundane sat-karma cannot help
one reach the absolute transcendental goal.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I feel very elated. I am convinced that nothing is superior
to harinäma. Kindly explain to us the ninth nämäparädha and quench our thirst
for knowledge.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Of all the instructions given in the entire Vedic
scriptures, the direction to chant harinäma is the foremost. Only those persons
who have cultivated firm çraddhä in çuddha-bhakti are eligible candidates for
hearing the unlimited glories of harinäma. Faithless persons are generally
averse to spiritual activities and to hearing the glories of harinäma, therefore
to instruct such irreligious faithless people about the esoteric details of
harinäma is an offence. Certainly, it is necessary to explain to the general
population that chanting harinäma is the most beneficial spiritual practice, and
that those who practice will achieve complete benediction. Yet, the confidential
knowledge of harinäma and the esoteric science of chanting should be disclosed
only to the worthy and faithful.

“When one becomes a realized uttama-adhikäré-bhakta one will acquire the çakti
to empower others to take up devotional service. An uttama-adhikäré can instil
çraddhä in harinäma in the conditioned jévas and then instruct them in the
chanting of harinäma, by bestowing his bhakti-çakti. However, as long as one
remains a madhyama-adhikäré-bhakta, one must carefully avoid companionship with
the faithless, the gross materialists, the disinterested, and the atheists.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, there are many persons who initiate unfit persons into
harinäma for material gain and personal fame. How should we see them?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “They are nämäparädhés, offenders against harinäma.”

Vijaya, “Finally, there is the tenth nämäparädha, kindly explain it to us more
fully.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Certain types of men are greatly inebriated by their
false ego, imagining themselves to be the monarchs of everything they survey,
and thus they treat their imagined subordinates as their serfs with the gross
mentality of ‘Me’ and ‘Mine’. On rare occasions, they are gripped with the
desire for renunciation and a curiosity for the spiritual unknown. They approach
the learned çuddha-bhaktas and hear about the glories of harinäma, but they do
not receive this knowledge with proper çraddhä and devotion and eventually turn
back to their material attachments. They are nämäparädhés. The second verse from
the Çré Çikñäñöaka recommends:

nämnäm akäri bahudhä nija-sarva-çaktis
 taträrpitä niyamitaù smaraëe na kälaù
etädåçé tava kåpä bhagavan mamäpi
 durdaivam édåçam ihäjani nänurägaù 

“‘My Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, in Your transcendental names there
is all good fortune for the living entity, and therefore You have many names,
such as “Kåñëa” and “Govinda” by which You expand Yourself. You have invested
all Your çaktis in these names, and there are no hard and fast rules for
chanting these names. My dear Lord, although You bestow such mercy upon the
fallen conditioned souls by liberally distributing Your transcendental names, I
am so unfortunate that I commit offences while chanting your name, and therefore
I cannot develop attachment for chanting.’

“So my son, these are the ten nämäparädhas. Avoid committing them and very soon
çré-kåñëa-näma will shower upon you blessings that will elevate you to the
platform of çuddha-bhakti and that of being an uttama-adhikäré.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I now understand that the mäyävädés, karmés, jïänés, and
yogés in general are all nämäparädhés. Should a çuddha-bhakta participate in
harinäma-saìkértana with them?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Vaiñëavas are advised not to join an assembly of
chanters that comprises a majority of nämäparädhés, and if the lead singer is a
nämäparädhé. However, in a kértana group consisting mainly of çuddha-bhaktas and
bhaktas upon the platform of nämäbhäsa, there is all good reason to participate.
And such participation will bring great satisfaction and spiritual bliss.

“It is late, I will stop now, but tomorrow you must hear in detail about
nämäbhäsa, the shadow of pure harinäma.”

Vijaya and Vrajanätha felt the stirrings of ecstasy while considering the glory
of harinäma. In voices trembling with loving emotions, they offered prayers to
Çré Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé Mahäräja, smeared their foreheads with the dust from
his feet, and took permission to leave. The entire way back to their house, they
were immersed in singing the favourite kértana of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu: “hari
haraye namaù kåñëa yädaväya namaù, yädaväya mädhaväya keçaväya namaù….”

Thus ends the twenty-fourth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma:
Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana, Part Twelve: Elucidation of Nämäparädha,
Offences against Harinäma

JDH 25: Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Chapter Twenty-five
Nitya-dharma: Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana 

Part Thirteen: Elucidation of Nämäbhäsa, Clearing Offences against Harinäma

The next evening, Vijaya and Vrajanätha arrived punctually at the bhajana-kuöéra
of Çréla Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé Mahäräja. Entering quietly, they offered their
prostrated obeisances in humble submission before their elderly spiritual
master. After a respectful silence, Vijaya said, “Gurudeva, kindly elucidate in
detail the nämäbhäsa-tattva. Our thirst to hear more and more about harinäma is
ever-increasing.” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “You are truly fortunate. Three topics must be
understood in order to perfectly comprehend näma-tattva: çuddha-näma, nämäbhäsa,
and nämäparädha. Çuddha-näma and nämäparädha have already been discussed in some
detail, so today we are going to concentrate on nämäbhäsa.”

Vijaya, “What is nämäbhäsa? And how many types of nämäbhäsa are there?” 

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Sanskrit word äbhäsa means, semblance, shadow, and
reflection. The känti, glowing radiance, that emanates from a lustrous object
creates two effects: chäyä, shadow; and pratibimba, reflection. Similarly, the
lustrous çuddha-harinäma that resembles the sun has two types of äbhäsa:
näma-pratibimba, the reflection of harinäma; and näma-chäyä, the shadow of
harinäma. Learned spiritual authorities frequently use terms like bhakty-äbhäsa,
bhäva-äbhäsa, näma-äbhäsa, vaiñëava-äbhäsa, etc. In all these examples, äbhäsa
indicates either of the two divisions, chäyä and pratibimba.” 

Vijaya, “How are bhakty-äbhäsa, bhäva-äbhäsa, näma-äbhäsa and vaiñëava-äbhäsa
related to one another?”

Gosvämé, “A Vaiñëava is someone who engages in chanting harinäma. When he
practises chanting on the platform of bhakty-äbhäsa, his chanting is nämäbhäsa
and accordingly he is called a vaiñëava-äbhäsa, not a çuddha-bhakta. In this
context, bhakti and bhäva mean one and the same thing; however, according to the
different states of development, bhakti is described as being either in the
restricted form of äbhäsa, or in full-blown form of çuddha.”

Vijaya, “Kindly describe the stage at which a jéva may be designated a
vaiñëava-äbhäsa.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Çrémad Bhägavatam, 11.2.47, states:

arcäyäm eva haraye
püjäà yaù çraddhayehate
na tad-bhakteñu cänyeñu
sa bhaktaù präkåtaù småtaù

“‘A devotee who faithfully engages in the worship of the Deity in the temple,
but does not behave properly towards other devotees, or people in general is
called a präkåta-bhakta, a materialistic devotee, and is considered to be in the
lowest position.’

“The word çraddhä as used here actually means çraddhä-äbhäsa, because çraddhä in
worshiping the Deity of Çré Kåñëa without simultaneous worship of the
kåñëa-bhaktas is but an äbhäsa of real çraddhä, certainly not çraddhä proper.
Therefore, this çraddhä-äbhäsa is either a chäyä or pratibimba of real çraddhä.
Being cultivated merely as a part of a custom or tradition, this level of
çraddhä is not apräkåta-çraddhä, transcendental faith, forming a part of
ananya-bhakti. The definition of vaiñëava-äbhäsa is focused upon a person whose
çraddhä and worship are präkåta, mundane, and who is therefore called a
präkåta-bhakta. 

“Çré Caitanya designated Hiraëya and Govardhana Majumadära, the uncle and father
of Çréla Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé, as vaiñëava-präya, almost Vaiñëavas. This
indicates that such persons decorate themselves with tulasé neck-beads and
tilaka, etc., like true Vaiñëavas, but their chanting is on the nämäbhäsa stage.
Thus, they are not actually pure Vaiñëavas.”

Vijaya, “Should mäyävädés, if they wear tulasé neck-beads, tilaka and chant
harinäma, be seen as vaiñëava-äbhäsa?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “No, they are certainly not even vaiñëava-äbhäsa. They
are offenders, hence they are known as vaiñëava-aparädhés. Possibly, their
chanting is at best pratibimba-nämäbhäsa, and so generously they may be viewed
as on the platform of pratibimba-bhäva-äbhäsa. In this way they may be called
vaiñëava-äbhäsa, but actually they should not be so designated since they are
terrible aparädhés. They do not deserve the honourable name ‘Vaiñëava’ in any
respect. They are to be categorized separately.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, please tell us more about çuddha-näma and His symptoms.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “When harinäma is chanted with a favourable attitude
devoid of mundane hankering and the desire for jïäna and karma and thus only for
the purpose of çuddha-bhakti, then çuddha-näma is being uttered. The desire to
invoke the acintya-çakti of çuddha-näma and experience supreme transcendental
bliss is not a mundane and motivated desire, but a pure desire within the realm
of çuddha-bhakti, known as anyäbhiläña-çünya-bhakti, devotion free from mundane
hankering. 

“Besides this spiritual desire to attain pure transcendental love, all other
desires concerning the results of chanting, such as the absolution of päpa and
the attainment of mukti, are anyäbhiläña, extraneous desires for things
unrelated to pure bhakti. As long as anyäbhiläña remains within the heart,
çuddha-näma does not manifest. The sädhaka lacks çuddha-näma as long as he
craves for the external rewards gained from the practice of karma, jïäna, and
añöäìga-yoga. The heart must be cleansed of these detrimental, non-devotional
motives and devotional qualities favourable to the achievement of çuddha-näma
must be cultivated. Then çuddha-näma is revealed, which may be defined as
harinäma free from nämäbhäsa and nämäparädha. 

“Çré Caitanya, the most munificent avatära and deliverer of the souls in
Kali-yuga, has instructed the following about chanting harinäma in the third
verse of the Çré Çikñäñöaka:

tåëäd api sunécena
taror iva sahiñëunä
amäninä mäna-dena
kértanéyaù sadä hariù

“‘One should chant çré-harinäma in a humble state of mind, thinking oneself
lower than the straw in the street. One should be more tolerant than a tree,
devoid of all sense of false prestige, and should be ready to offer all respects
to others. In such a state of mind one can chant çré-harinäma constantly.’”

Vijaya, “Master, what are the inherent differences between nämäbhäsa and
nämäparädha?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “If a person does not chant çuddha-näma, he chants
nämäbhäsa. Under certain conditions nämäbhäsa remains in that category, but
under other conditions nämäbhäsa enters the realm nämäparädha. When chanting is
contaminated by pramäda, ignorance, and bhramä, illusion, or by a lack of
attention or comprehension, we speak of nämäbhäsa chanting. In the case where
chanting is polluted by mäyävädé sophism, the desire for mokña or bhoga, then we
speak of nämäparädha. If the ten previously mentioned nämäparädhas are committed
unknowingly without guile, such chanting is nämäbhäsa.

“It is relevant to know that as long as nämäbhäsa is not stained by the symptoms
of nämäparädha, then the hope is very strong that one day such chanting will
become çuddha-näma. However, as soon as nämäparädha enters into nämäbhäsa
chanting, the possibility of çuddha-näma dwindles. The only remedy then is to
follow strictly the process of purification from the offences against harinäma
that I have given previously.”

Vijaya, “What is the process to elevate nämäbhäsa chanting to the level of
çuddha-näma chanting?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “A devotee must associate with çuddha-bhaktas. If he
stays in their association and cultivates näma under their guidance, then after
a certain time he will become purified and acquire a taste for çuddha-bhakti. At
this stage, the harinäma appearing on his tongue will become çuddha-näma.
However, at the same time, he must shun the company of nämäparädhés; otherwise,
the birth of çuddha-näma will be prevented. Sat-saìga is the only cause for the
prime benediction of the jéva. Therefore, our beloved Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
instructed Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé that sat-saìga was the seed and root of
çuddha-bhakti, whereas the company of bhogis, sense-enjoyers, and asat-saìga,
non-devotees, was destructive and should be rejected. Çré-kåñëa-näma must be
chanted in sat-saìga.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, does that mean that unless one renounces wife and family one
has no chance of chanting çuddha-näma?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “A serious devotee must renounce stré-saìga, the
association of women. Nonetheless, if the gåhastha-vaiñëava associates with his
legally wedded wife without attachment and properly conducts his family affairs,
one cannot say he is practising stré-saìga. The physical attraction between a
man and a woman is called yoñit-saìga, sexual attachment. A gåhastha-vaiñëava
who is free from such carnal attraction can chant çuddha-näma and achieve the
ultimate goal of human life, kåñëa-prema.”

Vijaya, “How many kinds of nämäbhäsa are there?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The Çrémad Bhägavatam, 6.2.14, states:

säìketyaà pärihäsyaà vä
stobhaà helanam eva vä
vaikuëöha-näma-grahaëam
açeñägha-haraà viduù

“‘One who chants harinäma in any manner is immediately freed from the reactions
of unlimited sins, even if he chants saìketa, indirectly, indicating something
else; parihäsa, jokingly; stobha, antagonistically; or even helä,
disrespectfully or neglectfully. This is accepted by all the learned scholars of
the scriptures.’

“Those persons who have insufficient knowledge about the principles of
harinäma-tattva and sambandha-jïäna chant nämäbhäsa, of which there are four
types: säëketa, pärihäsa, stobha, and helä.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, kindly elaborate upon säìketa-nämäbhäsa.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “At the moment of his death, Ajämila called out for his
son named, Näräyaëa. Näräyaëa is another name of Kåñëa, the Supreme Lord. Hence,
Ajämila was awarded the result of säëketa, unintentional, chanting of
kåñëa-näma. 

“The Muslims use the word häräma to describe pork, which is a forbidden food in
their religion. It also means something very dirty. This word has two syllables,
hä and räma. Räma is the name of the Lord, hence each time they utter ‘häräma’
they chant säìketa-nämäbhäsa, which ultimately saves them from the torture
chambers of Yamaräja. 

“All scriptures unanimously state that nämäbhäsa chanting awards mukti. The
sound vibration and letters in harinäma are inseparably linked with Çré Mukunda,
the bestower of mukti; thus, by the mere utterance of harinäma, the chanter is
brought into contact with Çré Mukunda. Mukti through brahma-jïäna is obtained
after long endeavour, but the same is easily achieved through nämäbhäsa
chanting.”

Vijaya, “Dear master, we have already read in many places of the scriptures that
arrogant empirical philosophers seeking mukti; the ignorant people; base
meat-eating, barbarian mlecchas; and atheistic or demoniac-minded persons
uninterested in spiritual goals, have all attained mokña simply by chanting
çré-kåñëa-näma in pärihäsa, that is jokingly—the second kind of nämäbhäsa.
Gurudeva, what is the third kind, stobha-nämäbhäsa?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “When a Vaiñëava chants çré-kåñëa-näma and another
person tries to antagonistically hinder him by disrespectfully mocking him, his
mimicry is known as stobha-nämäbhäsa. An example of stobha-nämäbhäsa is when an
agnostic person mimics the chanting of a Vaiñëava and derides him, saying, ‘How
absurd of you to think that your “Hari-Kestho” will take care of everything!’
The sound vibrations in harinäma possess such immense potency that even a
disrespectful and atheistic person can attain mukti by stobha-nämäbhäsa.”

Vijaya, “Dear master, what is helä-nämäbhäsa?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Uttering kåñëa-näma disdainfully and neglectfully
without love and appreciation is called helä-nämäbhäsa. The following
description is found in the Mahäbhärata, Präbhäsa-Khaëòa:

madhura-madhuram etan maìgalaà maìgalänäà 
sakala-nigama-vallé sat-phalaà cit-svarüpam 
sakåd api parigétam çraddhayä helayä vä
bhåguvara nara-mätraà tärayet kåñëa-näma

“‘The chanting of harinäma is the most beneficial of all spiritual and pious
activities. It is more relishable than the sweetest honey. It is the
transcendental fruit of all the çruti scriptures known as the Vedas. O best of
the Bhärgavas! If any person chants harinäma offenselessly even once, be it with
çraddhä or even helä, neglectfully, harinäma immediately offers him liberation.’

“In this çloka, the word çraddhayä means with love and faith and helayä means
without love and affection, that is disrespectfully. The phrase nara-mätraà
tärayet means that kåñëa-näma gives mukti even to the yavanas.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, isn’t chanting helä-näma an aparädha?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “When the elements of shrewd cunning and envy enter
helä-näma chanting, it is nämäparädha, but when chanted innocently and without
malice, helä-näma is nämäbhäsa.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, by nämäbhäsa chanting what results are available and what
results are unavailable?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Nämäbhäsa chanting may reward the chanter with bhukti,
mukti, and the eight yoga-siddhis. Yet, it cannot offer the ultimate goal of
human life, kåñëa-prema. When the chanter of nämäbhäsa associates with a
çuddha-bhakta and becomes elevated to the level of a madhyama adhikäré-vaiñëava,
then by çuddha-bhakti and çuddha-näma he soon attains kåñëa-prema.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, many vaiñëava-äbhäsa have worn the Vaiñëava symbols, applied
the tilaka marks upon their bodies, and have chanted nämäbhäsa for a long time
and yet are still unable to obtain prema. What is the cause?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Certainly the mystery of providence is in the answer.
Persons with bhakty-äbhäsa are certainly eligible and capable of attaining the
level of çuddha-bhakti. Unfortunately, they lack the determination of
ananya-bhakti and may misjudge people, taking a charlatan for a sädhu. They
associate with this so-called sädhu, imagining that this is sädhu-saìga. Often
their sädhu is a mäyävädé or even a pretender of bhakti. As an effect of this
asat-saìga and its concomitant bad instruction, whatever bhakty-äbhäsa they
possess becomes dissipated and they may even become vaiñëava-aparädhés. Thus,
they block their own devotional progress and may slide down to the offensive pit
of monistic mäyävädé thought. Having deviated from the path of çuddha-bhakti,
such a person suffers the humiliation of being counted amongst the lowest rank
of offenders. Thus, he gradually further distances himself from the ultimate
eternal destination. Nevertheless, at the platform of bhakty-äbhäsa if the
sukåti of the neophyte is strong enough, then it will extricate and protect him
from asat-saìga and deliver him to the sat-saìga of pure Vaiñëavas. Then, in
çuddha-vaiñëava-saìga he develops all the pure Vaiñëava attributes.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, what are the consequences of nämäparädha?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “If the results of the five mahä-päpa are multiplied a
million times, still they do not match the effect of nämäparädha. This should
give you an indication of the bad results born from nämäparädha.”

Vijaya, “Mahäräja, the results of nämäparädha are certainly as terrible as you
describe them, yet for the nämäparädhé are there no good results at all from
uttering the syllables of harinäma?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Harinäma rewards the nämäparädhé by fulfilling his
material desires, which initially had motivated him to chant. However, he is
never blessed with prema. Furthermore, along with his fulfilled desires, he also
has to suffer the consequences of nämäparädha, because his chanting was
instigated by material duplicity. Nevertheless, occasionally his chanting is
free from mundane cunning and caprice. In these moments, his chanting may be
evaluated as sukåti. When this sukåti matures and accumulates to a substantial
amount, he is rewarded with the saìga of a Vaiñëava who is attached to
çuddha-harinäma. Under this good influence, the näma-aparädhé learns to chant
properly and overcomes his nämäparädha. This methodology has also helped
steadfast monists and emancipationists to gradually attain the platform of
çuddha-bhakti.”

Vijaya, “Master, if one çuddha-näma is potent enough to nullify all sins, then
why is it necessary to chant incessantly?”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “The heart, consciousness, and demeanour of the
näma-aparädhés are always materially contaminated, depriving them of their
natural interest in Kåñëa. They develop distaste for the sädhus, spiritual
topics, and eventually anything related with transcendence. Simultaneously, they
develop an affinity for asat-saìga, misinterpretation of çästra, and immoral
activities. However, non-stop harinäma can progressively turn them away from
these impediments on the path of bhakti. Therefore, eventually, without the
contamination of asat-saìga, immorality, etc., their chanting will gradually
become purified, and thus spirituality will grow stronger in their lives.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, these nectarean instructions on näma-tattva are entering our
hearts and inspiring us with an unrelenting zest for chanting çré-kåñëa-näma. We
have now heard in detail about çuddha-näma, nämäbhäsa, and nämäparädha, and will
be eternally grateful to you for these nectarean explanations. If there is
anything else you would like to tell us in conclusion on this topic of chanting
harinäma, we are eager to hear it.”

Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, “Çréla Jagadänanda Paëòita has given us wonderful
instructions in his book, Prema Vivarta. In the seventh chapter, he writes: 

asädhu-saìge bhäé, kåñëa-näma nähi haya
nämäkñara bahiräya baöe, tabu näma kabhu naya

“‘My dear brothers, a person cannot purely chant kåñëa-näma in the company of
non-devotees. The sound and the syllables may be uttered, but that is not real
chanting.’ 

kabhu nämäbhäsa haya, sadä näma-aparädha
e saba jänibe bhäé, kåñëa-bhaktir bädha

“‘Chanting in this manner is at best nämäbhäsa, because chanting in bad
association is always mixed with nämäparädha. Dear brother, kindly understand,
these kinds of chanting—nämäparädha and nämäbhäsa—are detrimental to spiritual
progress and cannot be considered pure kåñëa-bhakti.’

yadi karibe kåñëa-näma, sädhu-saìga kara
bhukti-mukti-siddhi-väïchä düre pärihära

“‘If you really desire to chant kåñëa-näma purely, earnestly seek sädhu-saìga,
the company of the pure devotees of Çré Kåñëa. Reject all unwanted cravings for
sense enjoyments, liberation, mystic powers, and other material desires.’ 

daça aparädha tyaja mäna-apamäna
anäsaktye viñaya bhuïja ära laha kåñëa-näma

“‘Avoid the ten nämäparädhas and rise above the dualities of honour and
dishonour, and so on. Life in the material world is to be utilized in the
service of Çré Kåñëa. Render service to Çré Kåñëa without attachment to mundane
objects and chant kåñëa-näma constantly.’

kåñëa bhaktir anuküla saba karaha svékära
kåñëa-bhaktir pratiküla saba kara parihära 

“‘Accept everything favourable for executing kåñëa-bhakti as your very life and
completely reject anything that is unfavourable for practising kåñëa-bhakti.’ 

jyäna-yoga-ceñöä chäòa ära karma-saìga
markaöa-vairägya tyaja yäte deha-raìga 

“‘Do not endeavour to attain mundane speculative knowledge, fruitive results,
and mystic yoga-siddhis. False renunciation is called markaöa-vairägya, monkey
renunciation, which simply aims covertly at bodily pleasures and comforts.’ 

kåñëa ämäya päle, rakñe—jäna sarva-käla
ätma-nivedana-dainye ghucäo jaïjäla

“‘Bear in mind that Çré Kåñëa always protects and maintains every jéva. With
deep humility, submit your life and soul to the lotus feet of Çré Kåñëa, which
will free you from unwanted material desires.’

sädhu päbä kañöa baòa, jévera jäniyä
sädhu-bhakta-rüpe kåñëa äilä nadéyä

“‘The omniscient Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, knows how rarely the jéva may find
actual sat-saìga, so He has come personally as a pure devotee to Nadéyä.’ 

gorä-pada äçraya karaha buddhimän
gorä bäé sädhu-guru kebä äche än

“‘Therefore, all who are endowed with superior intelligence must take shelter of
the lotus feet of Çré Gauräìga, because Çré Gauräìga is the perfect sädhu and
guru.’

vairägé bhäi grämya-kathä na sunibe käne
grämya värttä nä kahibe, jabe milibe äna

“‘My dear brothers who are in the renounced order neither listen to mundane
prattles, nor participate in such discussions when you meet with them.’ 

svapne o nä kara, bhäi, stré-sambhäñaëagåhe stré chäòiyä, bhäi, äsiyächa bana

“‘Do not think of women, not even in dreams. The vows of your renounced order
forbid female association; always remember you have renounced wife and home and
come to the forest of Våndävana to engage wholeheartedly in bhajan.’ 

jadi cäha praëäya räkhite gauräìgera sane
choöa-haridäsera kathä thäke yena mane

“‘If you desire to maintain your relationship with Çré Gauräìga, then remember
constantly Choöa Haridäsa and why he was so strictly ostracised by the Lord
Himself.’

bhälä nä khäibe, ära bhäla nä paribe
hådayete rädhä-kåñëa sarvadä sevibe

“‘Refuse rich palatable food, expensive and fine clothes. Always remain humble
and constantly serve the Couple Divine, Çré Çré Rädhä Kåñëa, in the depth of
your heart.’ 

baòa haridäsera nyäya kåñëa-näma balibe badane
añöa-käla rädhä sevibe kuïja-bane

“‘Day and night, chant kåñëa-näma incessantly like Çréla Haridäsa Öhäkura. In
your heart be absorbed in the añöa-käléya-lélä service of Çré Çré Rädhä Kåñëa in
the bowers of Våndävana.’

gåhastha, vairägi-düìhe bale gorä-räya
dekha bhäi, näma vinä jena dina nähi jäya

“‘The instructions of Çré Gauräìga are for the gåhastha as well as for the
vairägi devotees. He said, ‘Take great care not to let a moment pass without
uttering kåñëa-näma.’ 

bahu-aìga sädhane, bhäi, nähi prayojana
kåñëa-nämäçraye çuddha karaha jévana

“‘If you want to advance on the path of çuddha-bhakti, not many rules and
spiritual practices are necessary. Simply beg for the complete shelter of
kåñëa-näma and thus purify your heart and consciousness.’ 

baddha-jéve kåpä kari, kåñëa haila nämakali-jéve dayä kori’ kåñëa haila
gauradhäma

“‘Çré Kåñëa descends to the material universe in the form of kåñëa-näma, simply
out of compassion for the conditioned jévas. Moreover, not long ago, to display
special mercy to the fallen jévas of Kali-yuga, Çré Kåñëa appeared as Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu in Gaura-dhäma, Navadvépa.’

ekänta sarala-bhäve bhaja gaura-jana
tabe ta’ päibe, bhäi, çré-kåñëa-caraëa

“‘So my dear brothers, serve the dear associates of Çré Gauräìga with sincerity
and a guileless heart. This will guarantee that you reach the safe harbour of
the lotus feet of Çré Kåñëa.’ 

gaura-jana-saìga kara gauräìga baliyähare kåñëa näma bala näciyä näciyä

“‘Glorify the magnanimity of Çré Caitanya and glorify His associates. Chant the
Hare Kåñëa mahä-mantra and dance in ecstasy.’ 

acire päibe bhäi näma-prema-dhana
yähä viläite prabhur ‘nade’ e ägamana

“‘Very quickly, you will be favoured with the most treasured object, näma-prema.
The Supreme Lord appeared in Nadéyä solely to distribute this priceless treasure
freely.’”

While Vijaya and Vrajanätha were listening to Çréla Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé
Mahäräja ecstatically recite Prema Vivarta deep spiritual feelings stirred up in
their hearts. After the recitation, Çréla Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé Mahäräja became
silent, almost unconscious for a long period. Slowly, he came back to the
present. With tears streaking down his cheeks, he stretched out his hands and
clasping them around the heads of his two disciples began to sing the following
bhajana:

kåñëa-näma dhare kata bala

“‘How marvellous and potent is kåñëa-näma!’

viñaya-väsanänale mora citta sadä jvale,
ravi-tapta maru-bhümi sama
kaåëa-randhra-patha diyä, hådi mäjhe praveçiya
bariñaya sudhä anupama

“‘My heart constantly burns within the flames of material desire,

Like the sun-scorched sands of the desert.

Yet harinäma mercifully enters through the gates of my ears,

And showers cool divine nectar to embalm my heart.’

hådaya haita bale, jihvära agreta cale
çabda-rüpe näce anukñaëa
kaëöhe mora bhaìge svara, aìga käàpe thara thara
sthira haite nä päre caraëa

“‘My heart now sings out kåñëa-näma,

And näma dances on the tip of my tongue,

With ecstatic sound, echoing all around.

My voice is faltering, my body shivers like a leaf,

My feet, beyond control, dance without respite.’

cakñe dhärä, dehe gharma, pulakita saba carma,
vivarëa haila kalevara
mürcchita haila mana, pralayera ägamana
bhäve sarva-deha jara-jara

“‘Tears cascade, perspiration fashions pearly drops,

And the hairs stand erect upon my pale supine form.

Conscious thoughts slip away,

And the emotions of bhäva plunder my core.’

kari eta upadrava, citte varñe çudhä-drava
more òäre premera sägare
kichu nä bujhite dila, more ta bätula kaila
mora citta-vitta saba hare

“‘O sacred näma, You disrupt my life,

You fill my heart with manna sweet,

You sweep me off my feet,

And deposit me on the sublime waves of endless prema.

I do not understand what is happening to me,

I am confused, mad; my mind is in a whirl.’

lainu äçraya jäì’ra hena vyavahära täì’ra
varëite nä päri e sakala
kåñëa-näma icchämaya jähe jähe sukhé haya
sei mora sukhera sambala

“‘Is this His behaviour, whose shelter I have sought?

I have no words, how may I describe Him?

Näma is wilful, freer than the wind,

Whatever makes Him happy, I treasure in my thoughts.’

premera kalikä näma, adbhuta-rasera dhäma
hena bala karaye prakäça
éñat vikaçi’punaù, dekhäya nija-rüpa-guna
citta hari laya kåñëa päsa

“‘Näma, O blooming flower of prema,

The saturated ambrosial trove,

Delight me once again with Your dynamic force.

Display even in droplets, Your wonder and beauty,

Steal away my heart and offer it to Kåñëa.’

pürëa-vikaçita haïä, braje more jäya laïä
dekhäya more svarüpa-viläsa
more siddha-deha diyä, kåñëa-päse räkhe giyä
e dehera kare sarba-näça

“‘May You blossom in full glory and transport me to Vraja,

Lifting up the gossamer curtains upon the stage of eternal time,

To open my eyes to the amorous pastimes of Rädhä and Kåñëa, the Couple Divine.

O give me my spiritual form and keep me next to Him,

Destroy this despicable tabernacle that is shackling me.’

kåñëa-näma cintämaëi akhila-rasera khani
nitya-mukta, çuddha-rasamaya
namera bäläé yata, sabha la’ye hai hata
tabe mora sukhera udaya

“‘Glorious, wish-fulfilling gem is kåñëa-näma,

A boundless cloud of ambrosial rain,

Eternal, independent, and pure.

O Lord! Crush all obstacles that check me from chanting Your nectarine name,

So that I may soon welcome the dawn of pristine bliss.’”

The singing continued well into the night—until Vijaya-kumara and Vrajanätha
realized with a start that the song had stopped. They begged permission to leave
Çré Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé Mahäräja and then set off home, their hearts
throbbing with joy.

Thus ends the twenty-fifth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Nitya-dharma:
Sambandha, Abhidheya and Prayojana, Part Thirteen: Elucidation of Nämäbhäsa,
Clearing Offences against Harinäma

JDH 26: Introduction to Rasa-tattva, The Principles of Spiritual Mellow

Chapter Twenty-six
Introduction to Rasa-tattva, The Principles of Spiritual Mellow

Vijaya-kumära soon left and stayed away from Navadvépa for almost a month.
Meanwhile, having received the consent of both Vrajanätha and Vijaya-kumära to
the marriage the grandmother of Vrajanätha did not waste a moment in finding a
bride. As soon as Vijaya-kumära heard from his sister that the brähmaëa
matchmaker had found the right bride for Vrajanätha, he promptly sent his
younger brother to Bilva Puñkariëé Village to take care of the necessary
arrangements. Finally, an astrologically auspicious date was fixed and the
marriage duly performed.

Soon after the marriage, Vijaya-kumära himself suddenly appeared in Navadvépa.
He seemed to be in a pensive, withdrawn mood—thoughtful about his spiritual
life, but apathetic towards all mundane discussions. Approaching him, Vrajanätha
said, “Uncle, you appear restless, why don’t you tell me what is going on? I
have tied the knot at your request, but now you do not reveal your heart to me.
What is your decision regarding yourself?”

Vijaya-kumära said, “I have decided to go on a pilgrimage to Puruñottama-kñetra
Puré with a group that leaves in a few days. Let us visit Çréla Gurudeva and ask
his permission.”

Late in the afternoon, Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha went to Çréväsäìgana and
related everything to Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, requesting his permission for
Vijaya to visit Puré-dhäma. Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé was very pleased with the
idea and informed his two disciples that the seat of the preceptorial line of
Çré Caitanya based at the house of Käçé Miçra in Puré was presently held by Çré
Gopäla-guru Gosvämé, a disciple of Çréla Vakreçvara Paëòita. Raghunätha däsa
Bäbäjé directed them to take darçana of his lotus feet and attentively receive
instructions from him. In fact, they were informed, the teachings of Çréla
Svarüpa Dämodara were under the safe and efficient custody of Çré Gopäla-guru
Gosvämé.

On their way back from Mäyäpura, Vrajanätha informed Vijaya-kumära of his desire
to accompany him to Puré, which pleased Vijaya very much. When they told
everybody in the house what they were going to do, grandmother not wanting to be
left behind decided to also accompany them to Puré. Therefore travel plans were
worked out for the threesome, and when the hot days of the Jyeñöha month
(May/June) were approaching, the pilgrims set out for Jagannätha Puré. 

After a few days, they reached Däntana and soon after Jaleçvara. In Remüëa they
had darçana of the famous Kñéra-corä Gopénätha Deity, moving on then to Çré
Virajä Kñetra on the banks of the River Vaitaraëé where they performed the
Näbhi-gäya-kriyä sacrifice, bathed in the Vaitaraëé River, and then arrived at
the garden of Ekämbara to see Lord Çiva in his form as Çré Liìga-räja.

A few days later, they arrived at the Çré Kñetra Puré of Lord Jagannätha. There
the group, originally large, dispersed into single persons and smaller groups to
allow for accommodation in the family houses of the various päëòäs—the temple
priests who were to act as guides for the pilgrims visiting Puré. Vijaya-kumära,
Vrajanätha and the grandmother took up residence in Haracaëòi Sähi. 

Soon after their arrival Vijaya and Vrajanätha set out for a few days of
visiting the many nearby holy spots, to take dips in the ocean, to
circumambulate the dhäma, to honour Jagannätha prasädam, and so forth.
Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha went inside the temple of Lord Jagannätha to have
darçana of the portrait-deity of Çré Caitanya and to see the impressions of His
lotus-feet upon the temple floor and the impressions of His fingers upon the
Garuòa-stambha pillar. The impressions were caused as the stones melted by the
transcendental touch of the Lord as he took darçana of Lord Jagannätha in
sublime transcendental ecstasy. Falling into trance, Vijaya-kumära and
Vrajanätha experienced the highest bliss whilst remembering the various pastimes
of the Lord. 

From there they went to see the house of Çré Käçi Miçra. First, they offered
obeisances to the khaòama, wooden clogs, and other personal paraphernalia of Çré
Caitanya that are kept there and also to the Çré Gambhéra room, which was the
quarters of Çré Caitanya during His final twelve years in Puré. The house of Çré
Käçi Miçra is very spacious and on one side of the complex there is the temple
of Çré Rädhäkänta, with the residence of Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé on the side
opposite to the temple. Upon entering the room of Çré Gopäla-guru Gosvämé,
Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha threw themselves down upon the ground with
humility, choking with emotions.

Observing their devotional attitude, Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé reached down,
raised them up and embraced them. After they had taken seats, he asked them,
“Where do you come from? Please tell me more about yourselves.” 

They introduced themselves and Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé was overwhelmed with
joy when he heard who they were and from where they had come. Upon hearing the
word Navadvépa, he said, “I feel very fortunate today to see such dhäma-väsés
and I am eager to learn how Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé, Gauracandra däsa, and the
other Vaiñëavas of Çré Mäyäpura are doing. Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé always reminds
me so much of my çikñä-guru, Çréla Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé.”

Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé sent for his disciple, Çré Dhyänacandra and told him
to feed the two honourable guests with prasädam. After mahä-prasädam
Dhyänacandra and the two guests sat together discussing many topics of Kåñëa
consciousness. Vijaya-kumära, a paëòita of the Çrémad Bhägavatam, and
Vrajanätha, an expert in many different branches of the scriptures, both
impressed Çré Dhyänacandra with their erudition, who then informed his guru
about the knowledge of the scriptures possessed by their two guests. Çréla
Gosvämé called for the two, benignly telling them, “You are the two priceless
gems of my heart, allow me to have your darçana every day as long as you are in
Puré.”

Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha humbly replied, “Master, Çréla Raghunätha däsa
Bäbäjé is well and in Mäyäpura. He has showered us with much mercy. Before we
came to Puré, he instructed us to approach your lotus feet and hear your
teachings.”

Çréla Gosvämé said, “Raghunätha däsa Bäbäjé is a great paëòita—always be sure to
follow his advice carefully. If you have any questions, come tomorrow at noon.
After the midday offering, join us for mahä-prasädam. Then we will meet and
discuss your questions.” Offering their respects to Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé,
Vijaya and Vrajanätha returned to their residence in Haracaëòi Sähi.

Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha came to the Rädhäkänta temple the next day at the
arranged time. After honouring mahä-prasädam, they went to see Çréla Gopäla-guru
Gosvämé and offered obeisances at his feet. They asked, “Prabhu, we are keen to
learn rasa-tattva, the truth of spiritual mellows. If we are allowed to hear
about rasa-tattva in kåñëa-bhakti from your lips, that will be a great blessing
for us. You are the chief preceptor of the Nimänanda disciplic line and in line
from Çré Caitanya you are the bona fide successor of Çréla Svarüpa Dämodara
Gosvämé. We offer our respects to you as you are a world äcärya. Whatever we
hear from you about rasa-tattva will crown our research and study with success.”

Çréla Gosvämé was extremely pleased to have quite unexpectedly found two such
worthy disciples. He said, “May the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
mercifully appeared in Navadvépa to acknowledge the Gaudiyas of Bengal and the
Oriyäs of Orissa as His own, Çré Nimäi Paëòita, the son of Çacémätä, bless us
with spiritual bliss. May Çréla Svarüpa Dämodara, who was a source of constant
ecstasy for Çré Caitanya by his flawless service in describing mädhurya-rasa
appear in our hearts. May Çréla Vakreçvara Paëòita, who captivated Nimäi Paëòita
with his scintillating dancing, and who rectified Çré Devänanda Paëòita by his
causeless compassion, shower benedictions upon you.

“Rasa is an unparalleled and most esoteric tattva. Rasa-tattva is the fully
blossomed flower of the transcendental pastimes of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Çré Kåñëa. When kåñëa-bhakti reaches the pinnacle of purity and becomes
dynamically active, it is transformed into kåñëa-bhakti-rasa, the mellows of
devotion to Kåñëa.”

Vrajanätha, “Is eligibility for kåñëa-bhakti-rasa gained through previous
practice?”

Gosvämé, “This question does not have a simple answer. I shall have to elaborate
upon the subject—you should try to understand it. You must have heard about
kåñëa-rati, loving attachment to Kåñëa, otherwise known as sthäyi-bhäva, steady
mood of devotion, from your Gurudeva. When sthäyi-bhäva is fanned and nurtured
for a long time by sämagré-bhäva, the ingredients of rasa, it evolves into
kåñëa-bhakti-rasa, the sublimely relishable mellows of çuddha-bhakti to Çré
Kåñëa.”

Vrajanätha, “Kindly speak about sthäyi-bhäva and sämagré-bhäva. Çréla Gurudeva
has explained bhäva to us, but we have not yet heard how the mingling of
sämagré-bhäva with sthäyi-bhäva produces kåñëa-bhakti-rasa.” 

Gosvämé, “Bhäva-bhakti and kåñëa-rati flourish in the heart of the devotee
because of his involvement in bhakti in his present or previous lifetimes. They
embody spiritual bliss, which at a mature stage transforms in to
kåñëa-bhakti-rasa. 

“Sämagré-bhäva is divided into four groups known as: vibhäva, that which causes
the appearance of kåñëa-rati; anubhäva, subsequent ecstasy; sättvika-bhäva,
constitutional ecstasy; and vyabhicäré-bhäva, aggressive ecstasy, also known as
saïcäri-bhäva, continuously existing ecstatic symptoms. Vibhäva, which is also
known as kåñëa-prema, is of two divisions: älambana, basic cause; and uddépana,
awakening stimuli. Älambana is the basic cause that gives rise to rati, divine
love, and is divided into two parts: viñaya, the beloved; and äçrayä, the lover.
The beloved object is viñaya, and the one who embraces love is the äçrayä. Thus,
the one who possesses rati is äçrayä, and the one who is the aim of that love is
viñaya. The heart of the Kåñëa devotee embraces rati, hence the devotee is the
äçrayä, and as Kåñëa is the object of the devotee’s love, so He is the viñaya.” 

Vrajanätha, “As you have said, vibhäva is divided into two: älambana, the basic
cause of transcendental love; and uddépana, items related to Kåñëa that
stimulate the transcendental love. Älambana is again divided into two: viñaya,
the object of love; and äçrayä, the receptacle of love. You have mentioned that
Kåñëa is the viñaya and that the devotee is the äçrayä. Now a question arises:
Is it possible that Kåñëa may also be the äçrayä of transcendental love?” 

Gosvämé, “Certainly, as we have mentioned previously, when the devotee loves
Kåñëa, Kåñëa is the viñaya and the devotee is the äçrayä. However, when Kåñëa
loves the devotee, Kåñëa is the äçrayä and the devotee is the viñaya.” 

Vrajanätha, “We have heard of the sixty-four qualities of Kåñëa from Gurudeva.
Is there anything more you would like to tell us on this subject?”

Gosvämé, “Çré Kåñëa is the repository of unlimited excellences, which are
manifest in Him to an absolute degree. Yet, because of the varieties on the
absolute platform, the excellences of Çré Kåñëa are displayed in differing
intensities. In Dvärakä, the excellences are pürëaù, complete; in Mathurä, the
excellences are pürëa-taraù, more complete; and in Gokula-Våndävana, the
excellences are pürëa-tamaù, most complete. 

“According to the time, place, and mood of the lélä, the manifestation of the
excellences and character of Çré Kåñëa also vary correspondingly. In His lélä,
Kåñëa is always the näyaka, hero, of which there are four types: dhérodätta,
dhéra-lalita, dhéra-praçänta, and dhéroddhata.” 

Vrajanätha, “Respected Gosvämé, kindly describe the dhérodätta näyaka.”

Gosvämé, “The dhérodätta näyaka is naturally very grave, gentle, forgiving,
merciful, compassionate, determined, humble, highly qualified, chivalrous, and
physically attractive.” 

Vrajanätha, “Dear Gosvämé, kindly describe the dhéra-lalita.”

Gosvämé, “The dhéra-lalita näyaka is naturally funny, witty, and expert in
joking, ever full of youthfulness, a relisher of rasa, very submissive to His
lovers, and extremely confident of Himself and thus free from all anxieties.” 

Vrajanätha, “Esteemed Gosvämé, kindly describe the dhéra-praçänta.”

Gosvämé, “The dhéra-praçänta näyaka is naturally very peaceful, forbearing in
distress and troubles, considerate and obliging to all.” 

Vrajanätha, “Gosvämé, kindly describe the dhéroddhata.”

Gosvämé, “The dhéroddhata näyaka is envious and jealous, arrogant, deceitful,
easily angered, restless, complacent, boastful and ostentatious.”

Vrajanätha, “Quite a few belligerent and also mutually contradictory qualities
were mentioned. How are all of these possible in the personality of just one
person?”

Gosvämé, “Çré Kåñëa possesses absolute power and opulence. By His inconceivable
potency, all these conflicting qualities and antipodes are perfectly harmonized
in His character. There are sufficient references in the scriptures
substantiating this point. 

“The Kürma Puräëa states:

asthülaç cäëuç caiva
sthüla ‘ëuç caiva sarvataù
avarëaù sarvataù proktaù
çyämo raktäntalocanaù

aiçvarya-yogäd bhagavän
viruddhärtho ‘bhidhéyate
tathäpi doño parame
naivähärya kathaïcana

guëäviruddhä apy ete
samähäryäù samantataù 

“‘Conflicting qualities are wonderfully adjusted in the personality of the
Supreme Lord. He is transcendental without a material form, minutely small or
atomic in size, yet He is also corporal and all pervasive in every respect.
Although His body does not have a material complexion, the aura of His body is
of a transcendentally darkish hue and the scriptures describe the edges of His
eyes as reddish. He is endowed with absolute opulence and therefore even
contrary characteristics may embellish His personality, but in His personality
they are not incriminating imperfections. Though these characteristics are
ostensibly opposing, in the personality of the Supreme Lord they shine in divine
excellence and are variously employed in His lélä by the supreme independent
will of the Lord.’

“In the Mahä-varäha Puräëa we read:

sarve nityäù çäçvatäç ca
dehäs tasya parätmanaù
hänopädäna-rahitä 
naiva prakåti-jäù kvacit 

paramänanda-sandohä
jïäna mäträs ca sarvataù
sarve sarva-gunaiù pürëäù
sarva-doña-vivarjjiäù

“‘All the varied expansions of the Personality of Godhead are transcendental and
eternal, and all of them repeatedly descend to all the different universes of
the material creation. Their bodies, composed of eternity, bliss and knowledge,
are everlasting; there is no chance of their decaying, for they are not
creations of the material world. These forms are concentrated spiritual
existence, always complete with all spiritual qualities and devoid of material
contamination.’

“The Vaiñëava-tantra states:

añöädaça-mahdosaiù rahitä bhagavat-tanuù 
sarvaiçvaryamayé satya-vijïänänanda-rüpiëé

“‘The body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the eternal embodiment of
the Absolute Truth and is, in every respect, full of knowledge, bliss, opulence
and unlimited potency and is completely free from all eighteen mahä-doñas, great
faults.’

“The Viñëu-yämala Tantra describes the eighteen mahä doñas:

mohas tandrä bhramo rukña-rasatä käma ulbaëah
lolatä mada-mätsaryau hiàsä kheda-pariçramau
asatyaà krodha äkäìkñä äçaëkä viçva-vibhramaù
viñamatva paräpekñä doñä añöädaçoditä

“‘The following eighteen characteristics have been defined as mahä-doña, great
faults: illusion, lethargy, tendency to error, rough uncouth dullard behaviour,
material lust, restlessness, pride, envy, hateful violence, lamentation,
laziness and looking for comfort, dishonesty, anger, hankering, fearfulness,
bewilderment, severe imbalance, and complete dependence on others.’

“In all manifestations of the Supreme Lord, the eighteen mahä-doñas are absent.
All the positive qualities are perfectly and supremely manifest in every avatära
of the Supreme Lord, and they are absolutely reposed in avatäré Çré Kåñëa, the
source of all incarnations. 

“Besides these characteristics, Çré Kåñëa possesses eight additional ones
asserting His virility and manliness as the Supreme Enjoyer: çobhä, decorated
with beauty and grace; viläsa, fondness for enjoying; mädhurya, pleasing elegant
sweetness; mäëgalya, auspicious dependability; sthairya, patient and steadfast;
tejä, power and influence; lalita, playfulness and a charming dresser; and
audärya, magnanimity. 

“The quality of çobhä also includes being merciful to one’s subordinates,
boldness in dealing with one’s equals, heroism and valour, enthusiasm,
straight-forwardness and truthfulness. When a person is seen to be always happy
and is accustomed to speak smilingly, he is considered to be in the mode of
viläsa, enjoyment. Measured gait, calm demeanour, amiable and sweet speech, and
desirability come under the purview of mädhurya. Being the emblem of
trustworthiness and dependability for the entire universe makes Kåñëa all
auspicious—mäëgalya. Kåñëa never wavers or falters from performing His work and
duty, so He is patient, fixed, and steadfast—sthairya. The ability to attract
everyone with power and influence is a sign of tejä. One who makes endless
efforts in romance and is a charming, beautiful dresser is lalita. Persons who
magnanimously give themselves to others are known as audärya. 

“Çré Kåñëa is thus the super-excellent näyaka. Although Kåñëa is supremely
independent of everyone, out of His causeless mercy, He relies upon Garga Åñi
for religious instruction; for learning the military art, He takes instruction
from Yuyudhäna, Sätyaki and other kñatriyas; and for good counsel He enquires
from His friend, Uddhava. He thus exhibits His versatility as a näyaka.”

Vrajanätha, “Prabhu, the specifics about Çré Kåñëa as the supreme näyaka,
embodying the entire spectrum of rasa, is very enlightening. Kindly tell us
about those intimate devotees who are eligible to taste rasa and have thus
attained the platform of vibhäva, wherefrom they appreciate the cause of
transcendental love.”

Gosvämé, “Devotees whose inner nature is deeply steeped in Kåñëa consciousness
ever taste rasa. The twenty-nine of Kåñëa’s qualities that begin with satya-väk,
truthfulness, and continue to hré-män, modest and bashful when glorified, as
mentioned in the scriptures, are also present in His devotees.” 

Vrajanätha, “What are the different classes of devotees eligible to cultivate
rasa?” 

Gosvämé, “There are two kinds of rasopa-yogé, devotees eligible to taste rasa:
the sädhaka and the siddha.” 

Vrajanätha, “Who are the sädhakas?”

Gosvämé, “A sädhaka is a devotee who has attained attraction for Çré Kåñëa but
is not yet completely freed from all anarthas. He is engaged in qualifying
himself to have the darçana of Çré Kåñëa by the cultivation of devotion in Kåñëa
consciousness. The Çrémad Bhägavatam, 11.2.46, describes the madhyama-adhikäré
devotees belonging to the category of sädhaka:

ésvare tad-adhéneñu
bäliçeñu dviñatsu ca
prema-maitré-kåpopekñä
yaù karoti sa madhyamaù

“‘An intermediate or second-class devotee, called madhyama-adhikäré, offers his
love to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is a sincere friend to all the
devotees of the Lord, shows mercy to ignorant people who are innocent, and
disregards those who are envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.’

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, are the neophyte devotees described in verse 11.2.47 of
the Çrémad Bhägavatam qualified for tasting rasa?”

arcäyäm eva haraye
püjäà yaù çraddhayehate
na tad-bhakteñu cänyeñu
sa bhaktaù präkåtaù småtaù

“‘A devotee who faithfully engages in the worship of the Deity in the temple,
but does not behave properly toward other devotees or people in general is
called a präkåta-bhakta, a materialistic devotee, and is considered to be in the
lowest position.’”

Gosvämé, “If they can progress to the stage of çuddha-bhakti by the mercy of a
pure devotee and become sädhakas they may become qualified to taste rasa
otherwise they cannot. Çré Bilvamaìgala Öhäkura is a shining example of a
sädhaka of bhakti. The individual sädhaka is to be judged by his level of
devotion.”

Vrajanätha, “Who are the siddha-bhaktas?” 

Gosvämé, “Those devotees who do not experience any of the kleças, the forms of
material distress, whose activities revolve solely around Çré Kåñëa whose
association they have realized, and who are always thirsty to drink the
pleasure-inducing rasa of kåñëa-prema are called siddhas. They are of two types:
sampräpta-siddha, those who have attained complete perfection; and nitya-siddha,
the eternally perfect souls.” 

Vrajanätha, “Who are the sampräpta-siddha devotees?”

Gosvämé, “Sampräpta-siddha devotees are subdivided into sädhana-siddha, those
who have attained perfection through sädhana, and kåpä-siddha, those promoted to
the stage of perfection by the mercy of the Supreme Lord or His pure devotees.”

Vrajanätha, “Who are the nitya-siddha devotees?”

Gosvämé, “The nitya-siddha devotees have been described by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé in
the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, 2.1.290, as follows:

ätma-koöi guëaà kåñëe
premänaà paramaà gatäù
nityänanda-guëäù sarve
nitya-siddhä mukundavat 

“‘The nitya-siddha devotees have achieved eternal, blissful life exactly on the
level of Çré Kåñëa and are able to attract Çré Kåñëa by the purity of their
transcendental loving service. Their most prominent characteristic is that their
love for Çré Kåñëa is millions of times more intense than any affection they may
have for themselves.’

“The Padma Puräëa, Uttara-khaëòa: 

yathä saumiträ-bharatau 
yathä saëkarñaëädayaù
tathä tenaiva jäyante
nija-lokäd yadåcchayä
punas tenaiva gacchanti
tat-padaà çäçvataà paraà
na karma-bandhanaà janma
vaiñëavänäï ca vidyate 

“‘By the desire of the Supreme Lord, the sons of Sumiträ devé, Çré Lakñmaëa and
Çré Bhärata, descended to earth from the spiritual realm, accompanying Çré
Rämacandra. Similarly, Çré Saìkarñaëa Balaräma descended to earth with Çré
Kåñëa. With the conclusion of the pastimes of Çré Räma upon the earth, all of
the associates of Çré Räma returned to the supreme eternal abode with Him.
Similarly, the Yädavas accompanied Kåñëa down to the mundane plane and at the
end of Kåñëa’s lélä they went back to Vaikuëöha with Him. Similarly, the
Vaiñëavas are also not bound by the laws of karma to take birth like ordinary
mortals.’”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, so far we have understood your elaborations on vibhäva
älambana. Kindly explain the stimuli known as uddépana.”

Gosvämé, “Objects and persons who stimulate bhäva are called uddépana. Çré
Kåñëa’s qualities, endeavours, embellishments, smile, bodily fragrance, flute,
bugle, ankle-bells, conch, foot-impressions, places of pastimes, Tulasé devé,
the Vaiñëavas, Ekädaçé days, and so on, are all uddépana.

“Of Kåñëa’s qualities there are three kinds: käyika, physical; väcika, vocal;
and mänasika, intellectual.

“His age is one of the main käyika qualities as described in the
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, 2.1.309:

kaumäraà païcamäbdäntaà
paugaëòaà daçamävadhi
kaiçoram ä-païcadaçäd
yauvanaà tu tataù param 

“‘The kaumära stage lasts until the age of five, paugaëòa up to age ten, and
kaiçora up to age fifteen. From then on, one is known as yauvana, a youth.’

“Kaiçora is further divided into ädi, beginning; madhya, middle; and çeña, end.
The most prominent käyika, bodily quality of Kåñëa, is His saundarya, beauty and
attractiveness, which is described as a perfect grace and symmetry of all His
bodily features. Prasädana, embellishments, includes His attire, His style of
dress, and His ornaments and jewellery.

“Kåñëa’s flutes, one of which is always in His hand, are of three varieties:
veëu, muralé and vaàçé. The length of the veëu is the width of twelve fingers;
he is as thick as a thumb and has six holes. The muralé measures two cubits in
length, has a hole at its mouth, and four other holes for various scales; he
produces a most enchanting sound. The length of the vaàçé is the width of
seventeen fingers; he has eight scale holes with half a finger’s width between
the scale holes. The playing hole at the mouth of the vaàçé is four fingers from
the top, while the last or bottom hole is three fingers from the end. Overall,
the vaàçé has nine holes. The conchshell held by Kåñëa opens to the right with a
clockwise whorl and is called Päïcajanya.

“All the paraphernalia and personal traits of Kåñëa are infused with
uddépana-bhäva, which evokes love for Çré Kåñëa. As the devotee’s attachment is
stimulated, the devotee becomes filled with bliss and sthäyi-bhäva is produced
within his heart. Sthäyi-bhäva in turn crystallizes into rasa. At this point we
will leave this topic, but we will continue with anubhäva and the other items
tomorrow. Try to assimilate what we have discussed today.” 

Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha took the dust from Çréla Gosvämé’s feet, smeared it
upon their heads, and begged permission to leave. Thereafter they went first to
the siddha-bakula tree that had provided cooling shelter to Çréla Haridäsa
Öhäkura for many years and then to have darçana of Lord Jagannätha. After
enjoying a wonderful evening, they finally returned home.

Thus ends the twenty-sixth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Introduction to
Rasa-tattva, The Principles of Spiritual Mellow

JDH 27: Further Consideration of Rasa-tattva

Chapter Twenty-seven
Further Consideration of Rasa-tattva

Part One: Anubhäva, Sättvika-bhäva and Vyabhicäré-bhäva

The next day, the two sädhakas, after having attended the noon äraté and
honouring the mahä-prasäda of the Jagannätha temple, arrived at the Rädhäkänta
temple thirsty for knowledge of rasa. Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha were well
versed in the scriptures, sincere Vaiñëavas, and residents of the holy dhäma of
Navadvépa, so the inhabitants of the Rädhäkänta temple äçrama held them in high
esteem and received them very respectfully whenever they visited. 

Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé had finished prasädam and was ready for his meeting
with Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha. He presented a marvellous appearance, attired
in the clean, fresh robes of a renunciant, with glowing ürdhva-puëòra tilaka
applied upon his prominent forehead and harinäma written with tilaka all over
his body conspicuously. Four strands of thick, dark tulasé neck beads were
coiled around his neck, his right hand was inside a little bag holding his
chanting beads, and his eyes were half-closed in deep meditation whilst
relishing kåñëa-näma. From time to time pearly teardrops would stream down from
his eyes, moistening his chest. At intervals he would cry out in the anguish of
separation, “O Gauräìga! O Nityänanda!” Then, his ample, softly glowing darkish
frame would become quiet again. He sat on a straw mat, his wooden clogs lay at a
distance and his water pot stood within reach. His disciple Dhyänacandra sat
nearby, writing down the procedures of Deity worship as given by his guru. 

When Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha entered the room, they offered prostrated
obeisances in front of Çréla Gosvämé, who affectionately hugged them and made
them sit down comfortably. As Çréla Gosvämé began they listened attentively to
his words, the subject of discussion being rasa-tattva, “Yesterday we spoke
about vibhäva. Today we will cover the three other sämagré-bhävas: anubhäva,
subsequent ecstasy; sattvika-bhäva, constitutional ecstasy; and
vyabhicäré-bhäva, aggressive ecstasy. 

“We have already defined vibhäva as the root cause, which ignites rati, loving
attachment, for the beloved within the heart of the lover. Rati churns up the
bhäva that is latent in the citta, heart and consciousness, of the sädhaka. The
various emotions that manifest externally in response to this awakened bhäva are
called anubhäva. Although the anubhävas when externally expressed seem to have a
similarity to vikära, the physical transformations caused by loving ecstasy, in
truth they are internal emotions in response to the bhäva within the heart of
the sädhaka.

“Nåtya, dancing; vilunöùana, rolling on the ground; géta, singing; kroçana,
lamenting loudly; tanu-moöana, stretching and yawning; huìkära making loud
roaring sounds; jåmbhana, yawning; dérgha-çväsa, releasing sighs; lokänpekñitä,
being neglectful of people’s reactions; läläsräva, salivation; aööa-häsa,
raucously laughing; ghürëä, swooning; and hikkä, hiccoughing, are anubhäva,
external symptoms indicating the presence of bhäva.”

Vrajanätha, “How can these physical transformations enhance the taste for rasa
in sthäyi-bhäva? Relishing rasa is actually an inner experience, whereas the
anubhäva symptoms find expression externally. How then may they be considered as
sämagré-bhäva, ingredients of rasa?”

Gosvämé, “Son, you have studied rhetoric and as such your mind is incisive. I
have never come across another person who asked such probing questions, though
when I was studying the science of rasa from Çréla Vakreçvara Paëòita I had
similar questions. My Gurudeva very kindly dissipated my doubts, and this
esoteric science of rasa-tattva was revealed to me in this way. 

“When the jéva’s internal activities on the transcendental çuddha-sattva plane
stimulate and nourish bhäva, a variety of vaicitrya, wonderful spiritual
feelings, is spontaneously manifested. This transcendental variety infuses the
heart with ineffable bliss in many different ways. Bliss causes vikära, physical
transformations, which are exhibited as the ecstatic symptoms known as
udbhäsvara. 

“When the heart is effervescent with emotion, the devotee is seen dancing; when
his heart hums with joy, the devotee sings aloud, and so on. These expressions
of spiritual emotion further nourish rasa. The exhibition of these ecstatic
symptoms is not the main cause of ecstatic emotion—which is actually vibhäva—but
anubhäva is the follower and experienced as the supporter of vibhäva. When
anubhäva is churned up in the heart by vibhäva, splendid symptoms are displayed
in the body. Thus, when the heart is flushed with vibhäva and sthäyi-bhäva, a
second function is initiated within the heart in the form of anubhäva, which
then acts to further nourish the vibhäva. Therefore, anubhäva really is a
positive and independent sämagré-bhäva. 

“The ecstatic symptoms are divided into two divisions: çéta, cooling, and
kñepaëa, propelling. Singings, yawning, and so on are called çéta. Dancing and
bodily contortions are called kñepaëa. There are other anubhäva symptoms, but
they are extremely rare, for instance: utphullata, the entire body pulsating
with excessive jubilation; rakta-udgama, exudation of blood; and
asthibhiù-sandhi-viyoga or karñaëa, dislocation or compression of the joints.
The extraordinary symptoms like kürmäkära, taking the form of a tortoise as a
result of ecstatic emotion, that our most beloved Çré Nimäi Caitanya exhibited
are neither possible, nor applicable to sädhakas.”

On account of the elevated plane of discussion, the two seekers of knowledge
paused to ponder over what they had just heard. Their esoteric quest was
satiated, at least for some time. Feeling gratitude for their benefactor, they
spontaneously stretched forward and gathered the dust from the feet of Çréla
Gopäla-guru Gosvämé, applying it reverentially to their foreheads. 

After a while, they set forth further inquiries, “Çréla Gosvämé, what is
sattvika-vikära?”

Gosvämé, “When the purified consciousness, known as citta, is under siege by any
kind of bhäva, either directly or indirectly, this state of the citta is
described as sattva. The range of emotions directly produced by this state of
sattva is called sattvika-bhäva. They are of three kinds: snigdha, wet; digdha,
moist; and rükña, dry.”

Vrajanätha, “Kindly explain these three sattvika-bhävas.”

Gosvämé, “Snigdha-sattvika-bhäva is divided into mukhya, principal, and gauëa,
subsidiary. When the heart is flooded with mukhya-rati, a direct mood of loving
Kåñëa, mukhya-snigdha-sattvika-bhäva is expressed through stambha, paralysis;
sveda, perspiration; and other principal symptoms. Where rati is slightly
indirect or obstructed, for instance when Kåñëa is at a distance, it is called
gauëa-rati, which produces gauëa-snigdha-sattvika-bhäva—the two main symptoms
being vaivarëye, pallor; and svarabhaìge, aphasia, which causes symptoms such as
faltering of the voice.

“If, besides mukhya and gauëa-rati, other loving sentiments accost the heart,
then the lukewarm bhäva of rati, digdha-sattvika-bhäva, is manifested through
kampa, shivering. Further, if an ostensibly devotional person who does not
possess true rati is struck with joy and astonishment by hearing the wonderful
qualities and pastimes of Kåñëa, which then leads to änanda, he experiences
rükña-bhäva, dry emotions. Romäïca, horripilation, is an exemplar.”

Vrajanätha, “How are the sattvika-bhävas produced?”

Gosvämé, “When the citta of the sädhaka—who is immersed in sattvika-bhäva, pure
spiritual emotion—is united with the präëa, the bodily life-energy, then the
präëa is placed in an abnormal condition, which causes perturbations in the
external body. As a result, symptoms like paralysis, perspiration, etc., are
manifested.”

Vrajanätha, “How many types of sattvika-vikära, ecstatic transformations, are
there?”

Gosvämé, “There are eight sattvika-vikära: stambha, paralysis; sveda,
perspiration; romäïca, horripilation; svara-bheda, faltering of the voice;
vepathu or kampa, shivering; vaivarëya, pallor; açru, tears; and pralaya,
devastation, unconsciousness.

“Präëa moves inside the body in a balanced manner upon the väyu, life-air, which
is a part of the gross elements. However, under certain circumstances, the präëa
predominates and besides associating with the life-air sometimes mixes with one
of the other remaining four mahäbhuta, gross elements, of the external body,
which are earth, water, fire, and ether. This conjunction causes different
transformations in the body in accordance with the particular mahäbhuta with
which präëa is mixing. 

“When predominating präëa mixes with bhumi, then stambha, paralysis, is
manifested; when mixing with apa, then açru, tears, are manifested; when mixing
with tejä, then vaivarëa, pallor, and sveda, perspiration, are manifested; when
mixing with äkäça, the body is overcome by pralaya, swoon and unconsciousness. 

“When predominating präëa is situated within its own element air, there are
three varying intensities of mixture each with its own particular effect. When
the intensity is manda, weak, the manifestation is kampa, shivering. When the
intensity is madhya, medium, the manifestation is svara-bheda, aphasia, for
example, faltering of the voice. And when the intensity is tévra, strong, the
manifestation is romäïca, horripilation.

“These eight sattvika-vikäras act both internally and externally, and in all
cases they may be laced with extreme perturbations. By some people, such vikäras
are called variously bhäva, principal emotion, and anubhäva, subordinate
emotion. However, one should note that anubhäva acts externally; hence, it
cannot be designated as sattvika-bhäva. The activities of anubhäva—manifesting
symptoms, for example, of nåtya, dancing—are generated by the intervention and
action of the intelligence; thus, sattvika-bhäva is not directly involved.
Sattvika-bhäva, however, acts directly without any interference of the intellect
in such manifestations as stambha, being stunned. Therefore, anubhäva and
sattvika-bhäva are separate, individual bhävas.”

Vrajanätha, “Revered Gosväméjé, kindly explain the cause of symptoms like
stambha, etc.”

Gosvämé, “Stambha occurs when the devotee is speechless, feeling vacant and
acute inertia because of one or all of the following emotions: harña, delight;
bhäya, fear; äçcarya, astonishment; viñäda, extreme depression; or amarña, rage.
Sveda, perspiration, accompanied by salivation and melting of the heart, is
caused by delight, fear, or rage. Romäïca, horripilation, happens because of
astonishment, delight, enthusiasm, or fear. Svara-bheda, aphasia, leading to
faltering of the voice, is prompted by lassitude, amazement, wrath, pleasure, or
fear. Kampa, uncontrollable shivering, is a result of laulya, spiritual greed,
brought about by fear, anger, or delight. Vaivarëa, pallor, is caused by a
combination of lassitude, rage, and fear. Açru, involuntary tears, pour out
caused by feelings of delight, anger, or lassitude. Tears of delight are çétalä,
cold, and tears of anger are uñëa, hot. Pralaya, unconsciousness, is caused by
overpowering spiritual joy or sorrow that erases consciousness and the ability
to act, thus causing swoon and falling to the ground.

“Sattvika-bhäva has four levels, depending on the intensity of the pure emotion:
dhümayitä, smoking; jvalitä, smouldering, uddépta, alight; and süddépta,
intensely flaming. Rükña-sattvika-bhäva, dry emotion, is mostly dhümayitä,
smoking. Snigdha-sattvika-bhäva, wet emotion, generally reaches the higher
intensity levels. Rati is the cause of the most wonderful and inexplicable
bliss, but because rükña-bhäva lacks rati it is flaccid, and thus without
splendour.” 

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, I understand that sattvika-bhäva blossoms in the heart as
a result of enormous good fortune. How shall we understand the bhävas expressed
in stage performances by artistes and by many other persons in order to achieve
their particular worldly objectives?” 

Gosvämé, “Sattvika-bhäva springing from sincere execution of unalloyed and
unmotivated devotional service is vaiñëava-bhävam, spiritual emotion expressed
by pure Vaiñëava devotees. All the other inferior bhävas are divided into four
categories in a descending scale: raty-äbhäsa, false semblance of love;
sattva-äbhäsa, impure emotion that is a distant and loose resemblance of pure
emotion; niùsattvä, postured emotion for a material purpose; and pratépa,
emotion born from a hostile attitude.”

Vrajanätha, “What is raty-äbhäsa?”

Gosvämé, “The emotional attachment expressed for the Supreme Lord by the
aspirants for salvation, such as the monistic mäyävädés sannyäsés of the Çaìkara
school, upon hearing topics about Kåñëa is called raty-äbhäsa.” 

Vrajanätha, “What is sattva-äbhäsa?”

Gosvämé, “When narrations about Kåñëa’s activities are heard by the dull and
materially conditioned, they may feel joy, astonishment, and material
sentimental emotion known as sattva-äbhäsa, which superficially appears like the
ecstatic, transcendental, pure emotion of sattvika-bhäva. Soft-hearted women,
empiricists and mémäàsaka philosophers may experience this emotion.” 

Vrajanätha, “What is niùsattvä?”

Gosvämé, “The postured sentiments—often expressed through crying and
horripilation—displayed by persons with duplicitous hearts, by stage actors, and
by those using such display to achieve their mundane goals, are known as
niùsattvä. Generally, such hypocritical persons are hard-hearted materialists,
but by constantly exercising their tear glands, they produce artificial tears,
and soon such false crying becomes second nature.”

Vrajanätha, “What is pratépa?”

Gosvämé, “When one performs activities that go against Kåñëa and His edicts,
fear and anger arise. These emotions are known as pratépa-bhäva-äbhäsa. Kaàsa’s
fearful demeanour is a fine example of pratépa.”

Vrajanätha, “Vibhäva, anubhäva, and sattvika-bhäva are now clearer to us than
ever. We have also understood the differences between anubhäva and
sattvika-bhäva. Kindly explain the remaining sämagré bhäva, which is known as
vyabhicäré-bhäva, aggressive ecstasy.”

Gosvämé, “All in all there are thirty-three vyabhicäré-bhävas. Vi means
‘specifically’; abhi means ‘towards’; and cäré means ‘moving’. They are called
vyabhicäré-bhävas because they specifically move towards and nourish
sthäyi-bhäva. As they saïcärita, travel throughout, the body, mind and words,
they are also referred to as saïcäré-bhävas. They are waves that arise from the
nectarean ocean of sthäyi-bhäva causing it to swell before they return to their
source. 

“The thirty-three vyabhicäré-bhävas, bodily symptoms, which manifest in ecstatic
love, are as follows: (1) nirveda, indifference; (2) viñäda, moroseness; (3)
dainya, meekness; (4) gläni, a feeling that one is in a faulty position; (5)
çrama, fatigue; (6) mada, madness; (7) garva, pride; (8) çaìkä, doubt; (9)
träsa, shock; (10) ävega, intense emotion; (11) unmäda, craziness; (12)
apasmära, forgetfulness; (13) vyädhi, disease; (14) moha, bewilderment; (15)
måti, death; (16) älasya, laziness; (17) jäòya, invalidity; (18) vréòä, shame;
(19) avahitthä, concealment; (20) småti, remembrance; (21) vitarka, argument;
(22) cintä, contemplation; (23) mati, attention; (24) dhåti, forbearance; (25)
harña, jubilation; (26) autsukya, eagerness; (27) augrya, violence; (28) amarña,
anger; (29) asüyä, jealousy; (30) cäpalya, impudence; (31) nidrä, sleep; (32)
supti, deep sleep; and (33) prabodha, awakening.

“There are two groups of saïcäré-bhäva: svatantra, independent; and paratantra,
dependent. Dependent saïcäré-bhäva is further divided into vara, favourable, and
avara, unfavourable. Vara is also divided into two: säkñät, direct; and
vyavahita, indirect. Svatantra saïcäré-bhäva is divided into three: rati-çünya,
without rati, love; rati-anusparça, touching rati; and rati-gandha, flavoured
with rati.

“When these bhävas appear in persons who are adverse to Kåñëa, or are directed
toward vipakña, an inappropriate person or object, they are of two types:
prätikülya, contrary; and anaucitya, unfit. All the bhävas have four different
daçäs, phases: utpatti, birth and growth of ecstatic emotion; sandhi, union of
two emotions; çäbalya, friction upon fusion of various emotions; and çänti,
pacification of emotion.”

Vrajanätha, “We would like to know about these four phases of bhäva in more
detail. Bhäva-utpatti, creation of ecstatic emotion, is easy to understand, but
not the others.”

Gosvämé, “The confluence of two similar or dissimilar bhävas is called sandhi,
union. For example, çrama, fatigue, and älasya, laziness, may arise
simultaneously—that is a sandhi of two similar emotions. Harña, pleasure, and
çaìkä, anxiety, may appear simultaneously—that is a sandhi of two dissimilar
emotions.” 

Vrajanätha, “What is bhäva-çäbalya?”

Gosvämé, “Çäbalya is a condition where many different bhävas assert themselves,
simultaneously causing friction and jostling amongst themselves, and where one
bhäva even tries to overpower the other. When Kaàsa heard of Kåñëa’s pastimes,
he experienced a competition between kroòa, anger, and träsa, fear, in his
consciousness. This is bhäva-çäbalya.”

Vrajanätha, “What is bhäva-çänti?”

Gosvämé, “When bhävas, which have reached great intensity, are pacified and fade
away, we speak of bhäva-çänti, pacification of emotion. Kåñëa’s young cowherd
boy-friends were extremely anxious and grief-stricken when they could not see
Kåñëa, but when they heard His flute, even from a distance, their viñäda,
trepidation, was instantly calmed down.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, is there more to be said on this topic?”

Gosvämé, “Thirty-three vyabhicäré-bhävas as well as the one mukhya-sthäyi-bhäva
and the seven gauëa-sthäyi-bhävas, which will be dealt with later, together
total forty-one bhävas. All of them produce vikäras in the bodily system and are
citta-våtti, tendencies of the heart that produce bhäva.” 

Vrajanätha, “Which specific bhävas do they give birth to?”

Gosvämé, “They create the eight añöa-sattvika-bhävas and all the anubhävas that
follow the central vibhäva.”

Vrajanätha, “Are they all an innate part of the original spiritual nature and
personality of the devotee?”

Gosvämé, “No, some are natural, but others are ägantuka, transitory and
adventitious. The sthäyi-bhäva of every individual devotee is his natural bhäva.
In general the vyabhicäré-bhävas are transitory.”

Vrajanätha, “Do all the individual devotees possess the same bhäva?”

Gosvämé, “No, the devotees are naturally individuals, therefore their
inclinations are particular and varied. According to the devotee’s innate
disposition, different bhävas manifest and acquire a diversity of character. In
addition, the bhävas take on variegated shades depending on the condition of the
devotee’s citta, namely gariñöha, superior; lagiñöha, light; and gämbhérya,
grave. However, amåta, the nectar of devotion, is always fluid by nature and is
thus the intrinsic characteristic of the heart of all the devotees. 

“Let us stop today’s conversation at this point, we shall continue tomorrow,
when I will explain sthäyi-bhäva.”

After offering their prostrate obeisances before Çré Gopäla-guru Gosvämé,
Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha begged permission to leave. 

Thus ends Chapter Twenty-seven of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Further Consideration
of Rasa-tattva, Part One: Anubhäva, Sättvika-bhäva and Vyabhicäré-bhäva

JDH 28: Further Consideration of Rasa-tattva

Chapter Twenty-eight
Further Consideration of Rasa-tattva

Part Two: Mukhya-rati, Principal Attachment 

The next day Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha returned to Çré Gopäla-guru Gosvämé
and after offering their prostrate obeisances continued with their esoteric
enquiries. In particular, they wished to clarify certain subjects of rasa-tattva
that had been discussed during their earlier visits.

Vrajanätha started the enquiries, “Gurudeva, you have described the four bhävas:
vibhäva, anubhäva, sattvika-bhäva, and vyabhicäré-bhäva. Amongst these four
bhävas was there mention of sthäyi-bhäva, permanent spiritual mellow?”

Gosvämé, “All the categories you have mentioned are the different forms of
bhäva. From amongst them, the bhäva that pre-eminently asserts itself like an
emperor, embracing, controlling and subjugating all other bhävas, whether
congenial or conflicting, is the devotee’s sthäyi-bhäva. Kåñëa-rati,
transcendental love of Kåñëa, situated within the heart of the devotee äçrayä is
known as sthäyi-bhäva. When we discussed äçrayä previously under the topic of
sämagré-bhäva, we placed äçrayä in the category of älambana, basic cause, within
the spectrum of vibhäva. In this way, we indirectly indicated the sthäyi-bhäva
within the heart of the devotee. Sthäyi-bhäva, the predominant bhäva, brings the
rest of the bhävas under its sway and orchestrates varying bhävas to act as the
central impetus in the creation of rasa. Simultaneously the remaining bhävas may
be engaged to play the role of assistants to the particular bhäva acting
centrally. Although sthäyi-bhäva is the äsvädayan-rüpa, the cause of tasting
spiritual mellow, it also is the äsvädya-rüpa, the object of relish.

“In solitude deeply contemplate the nature of sthäyi-bhäva and thus analyse the
distinctive features that separate sthäyi-bhäva from the other bhävas. Rati born
of sthäyi-bhäva is of two kinds: mukhya-rati and gauëa-rati.” 

Vrajanätha, “What is mukhya-rati?”

Gosvämé, “Earlier in our explanation of bhäva-bhakti, we described rati of the
çuddha-sattva category. That is the mukhya-rati, to which we are now referring.”

Vrajanätha, “When we studied nyäya—an insignificant branch of knowledge compared
to our present level of education—our syllabus included a section on rati. My
views on rati from that time have completely changed because of my realizations
about the state of çuddha-sattva, transcendence. It is now clear to me that the
sublime exchanges of rasa with the Supreme Lord are only feasible for a jéva
situated in his svarüpa untouched by material contamination.

“The rhetoricians’ concept of rati is mundane, as it proposes that rati is
experienced by the jéva only in his materially embodied condition and by his
subtle body of mind and intellect. Your explanation of rati has opened my eyes
to a divine transcendental understanding of rasa, the most precious treasure of
the çuddha-jéva, pure soul. The baddha-jéva, conditioned soul, on the contrary
has very little access to transcendental rasa and can only eventually come to
the position of relishing such rasa by the mercy of the hlädiné-çakti. I would
like to learn more about the details of çuddha-rati, pure transcendental
attachment.”

Çré Gopäla-guru Gosvämé was extremely pleased to hear Vrajanätha’s perceptive
analysis of this esoteric philosophy. Pearly teardrops rained down from his eyes
in uncontained joy, he embraced Vrajanätha and said, “I am truly fortunate to
have gained a disciple like you. Listen, mukhya-rati is divided into two:
svärtha and parärtha.”

Vrajanätha, “What is the nature of svärtha-mukhya-rati?”

Gosvämé, “Svärtha-rati nourishes itself with the help of all congenial bhävas;
however, opposing bhävas produce its diminution.” 

Vrajanätha, “What is the nature of parärtha-mukhya-rati?”

Gosvämé, “Parärtha-rati contracts itself to accommodate both congenial and
opposing bhävas. 

“There is another higher division of mukhya-rati into the five types: çänta,
neutrality; däsya, servitude; sakhya, fraternity; vätsalya, parenthood; and
mädhurya, conjugality. Just as the sunrays produce many colours of light when
passing through different varieties of quartz; similarly, çuddha-rati produces
distinct and variant symptoms when passing through the different shades of
sthäyi-bhäva.”

Vrajanätha, “Çréla Gosvämé, what is this çuddha-rati, pure love?”

Gosvämé, “Principal çuddha-rati is subdivided into three types: sämänya general;
svaccha, clear; and çänta, peaceful.

“Sämänya-rati is the attachment the people in general feel for Çré Kåñëa as the
Supreme Lord. However, in dedicated devotees mukhya-rati takes on a variety of
transcendental moods towards Kåñëa according to the particular devotee’s innate
spiritual disposition. When such kåñëa-rati passes through the devotee’s pure
bhäva, it is called svaccha, clear or transparent. Devotees infused with such
rati sometimes see Kåñëa as the Almighty Master and glorify Him with prayers in
the mood of däsya. Otherwise, they see Kåñëa as their friend and joke with Him
in the of mood sakhya. Alternatively, they think of Kåñëa as their son who is to
be fondled and protected with parental care in the mood of vätsalya. Then again,
in the mädhurya mood they see Kåñëa as their känta, lover, and feel exhilarated
in His company. In addition, sometimes in parama-brahman rati, they lovingly
meditate upon Kåñëa as the Supreme Soul within their heart. In çänta-rati,
devotees with rati meditate upon Kåñëa as Paramätmä and achieve transcendental
consciousness characterised by peacefulness and equipoise. 

“Çuddha-rati is again divided into two: kevala-rati, exclusive; and
saìkulä-rati, mixed. In kevala-rati, only one mood of rati is in full play,
without the intrusion of any other. This exclusive mood is exhibited by the
residents of Vraja, such as servants like Rasäla, friends like Çrédämä and
Sudämä, and by guru-jana, senior personalities, such as Nanda Mahäräja. When a
mixture of two or more rasas is displayed within the rati of a devotee, we speak
of saìkulä-rati. Uddhava, Bhéma, and Rädhäräëé’s elderly maid, Mukharä, are
examples of devotees with saìkulä-rati.” 

Vrajanätha, “I had the impression that the eternal devotees of Vraja did not
manifest çänta-rati. However, I now see that a little çänta-rati is present in
Vraja in a mixed form. According to the jaòa-alaìkära, materialistic books of
nyäya, there is no rati in the state of çänta. However, we see the presence of
rati in para-brahman-rati and thus this particular rati—which is çänta-rati—must
be accepted as one variety of attachment for the Supreme. Now I am eager to hear
about the symptoms of däsya-rati.”

Gosvämé, “Däsya-rati is evoked within the devotee when he considers with a
reverential attitude, ‘Kåñëa is my Lord and I am His servant.’ Those devotees
who are firmly attached to this rati are not charmed by anything of this world.”


Vrajanätha, “What are the qualities of sakhya-rati?”

Gosvämé, “Those devotees who consider Kåñëa as their equal and have unflagging
faith and absorption in this rasa towards Him possess sakhya-rati. In the mellow
of sakhya-rati there is joking, laughing, and similar activities of friendship.”


Vrajanätha, “What are the characteristics of vätsalya-rati?”

Gosvämé, “Persons senior to Kåñëa shower kindness and love upon Him in
vätsalya-rati. The characteristic of this rati is a protective mood in which the
guardians look after Kåñëa, perform auspicious rituals for His protection and
welfare, offer Him their blessings, fondle Him with affection, and so on.”

Vrajanätha, “Kindly also describe mädhurya-rati-lakñaëam, the nature of
attachment in the conjugal mellow.”

Gosvämé, “When the vraja-gopés’ love for Kåñëa is prompted by the eight types of
sambhoga, enjoyment, such as smaraëa, remembrance; darçana, sight, and so on,
this mellow is called mädhurya-rasa. This rati is expressed by such means as
kaöäkña, sidelong glances; bhåu-kñepa, longing amorous glances; priya-väëé,
sweet words; and häsya, laughing and joking. As one moves from çänta to
mädhurya, the rati is increasingly relishable and blissful. According to their
elevation in bhakti, these moods are eternally present in the pure devotees. 

“Thus briefly, I have enumerated the five kinds of mukhya-rati, principal
attachment.” 

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, please now describe gauëa-rati that gives rise to the
secondary spiritual rasas.”

Gosvämé, “The superexcellent secondary bhävas that belong to the älambana, the
transcendental lover and beloved, are known as gauëa-rati. There are seven
gauëa-ratis: häsya, laughter; vismaya, astonishment; utsäha, eagerness; çoka or
karuëa, lamentation or compassion; krodha, anger; bhaya, fear; and jugupsä or
nindä, scorn, ghastliness, and disgust. Only the first six bhävas can be
directed towards Kåñëa. When çuddha-rati appears within the heart of a devotee
and he feels his bodily activities to be an object of disgust, we speak of
jugupsä-bhäva, scorn, which is considered the seventh gauëa-bhäva. 

“Between the secondary gauëa-bhäva symptoms and the primary
mukhya-çuddha-sattva-bhäva there are inherent differences. Yet, because
gauëa-bhäva is linked with the contracting parärtha-mukhya-rati, the seven
emotions beginning with häsya are categorised as rati. In certain devotees, one
or more of the gauëa-bhävas reach a constant state in their relationship with
Kåñëa, but this is generally not the case. Thus, gauëa-bhävas are referred to as
irregular, unsteady and temporary, and only under specific conditions do they
attain sufficient force to dislodge the primary rati and establish themselves as
the preponderant bhäva.”

Vrajanätha, “In the teachings of nyäya, there is mention of eight bhävas such as
çåìgära, conjugality; häsya, jocularity; and karuëa, mercy; and so on. I now
realize that these concepts of bhäva as explained in the teachings of nyäya are
only applicable to the material rasa that is exhibited in the ordinary mundane
dealings between a man and a woman. They play no role in the description of the
pure, transcendental rasa of Vraja. The material bhävas thrive in the mundane
mind and consciousness, but never in the purified spiritual consciousness. The
presentation given by the great spiritual preceptors in describing pure
sthäyi-bhäva with its five mukhya-rasas and seven gauëa-rasas is accurate in all
respects. 

“Now, kindly expand upon häsya-rati, the attachment causing the mellow of
humour.”

Gosvämé, “Häsya rati appears when funny words are spoken, when the dress looks
odd, when actions are caricatured, and so on. Opening of the heart, widening of
the eyes, flaring of the nostrils, trembling of the lips and cheeks,
characterise this mellow. This mellow is also generated by love of Kåñëa,
combined with saìkoca-bhäva, the emotion of hesitation.” 

Vrajanätha, “What are symptoms of vismaya-rati, attachment causing the mellow of
astonishment?”

Gosvämé, “By seeing something wonderful or extraordinary, the heart expands in
vismaya, astonishment and wonder. The external symptoms are such as widening of
the eyes, exclamations of appreciation, and horripilation.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the symptoms of utsäha-rati, attachment causing the mellow
of enthusiasm?”

Gosvämé, “Utsäha is the resolute enthusiasm of the mind to engage in grand
projects, which are eulogized by stalwart saints. This mellow displays symptoms
such as urgency in activity, impatience, great exertion, and fervour.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the symptoms of krodha-rati, attachment causing the mellow
of anger?”

Gosvämé, “In krodha-rati, the heart burns in rage, on account of
pratiküla-bhäva, displeasing and unfavourable feelings. This mellow displays
symptoms such as callous intemperance, frowning, and livid eye expressions.” 

Vrajanätha, “What are the symptoms of bhaya-rati, attachment causing fear and
dread?”

Gosvämé, “Bhaya-rati is caused by seeing a terrifying scene where the heart
palpitates with restless apprehension. This mellow displays symptoms such as an
endeavour to conceal oneself, dryness of the heart, and flight from the scene.” 

Vrajanatha, “What are the symptoms of jugupsä-rati, attachment causing scorn and
condemnation?”

Gosvämé, “Jugupsä-rati is evoked by something contemptuous, leading to disgust.
Certain physical transformations are exhibited in this rati, such as spitting,
grimacing, and spontaneous words of vilification. These feelings are only
considered transcendental rati, when they are favourably disposed to Kåñëa. If
they are not, they are simply the mundane foibles of the heart of an ordinary
mortal.”

Vrajanätha, “How many bhävas are there in bhakti-rasa?”

Gosvämé, “There are eight sthäyi-bhävas, thirty-three saïcäri-bhävas, and eight
sattvika-bhävas, which total forty-nine. When these bhävas are mundane, they
stem from the three modes of material nature and become the cause of fleeting
joys and sorrows. However, when they are dovetailed with Kåñëa, they become
transcendental to the material modes and are sources of profound immortal bliss.
Even in çoka, deep despondency, they give forth immense pleasure.

“Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé writes that Kåñëa and His dear devotees, headed by the
gopés, act as the älambana—beloved and lovers, the foundation of bhakti-rasa—and
therefore generate mutual rati in the form of the eight sthäyi-bhävas of loving
attachment. In this way, Kåñëa and His devotees are the käraëa, cause, of the
rasa of rati, spiritual love. The eight sattvika-bhävas causing the eight
sättvika vikäras, transcendental bodily transformations, beginning with stambha,
being stunned in ecstasy, are counted among the kärya, effects, of rati. And the
thirty-three vyabhicäré-bhävas (saïcäré-bhävas) beginning with nirveda,
indifference to material enjoyment; act as sahäya, assistants, of this rati.
However, in the final analysis, when rasa is evidently manifest, these various
manifestations of rati are no longer described as käraëa, cause; kärya, effect;
and sahäya, assistants; but as vibhäva, instigative causes of ecstasy. Vibhäva
has the power to make these manifestations of rati increasingly competent to
relish the viñaya, Çré Kåñëa. Therefore, the äcäryas also categorise the many
various manifestations of rati as vibhäva, instigative causes of bhäva.
Furthermore, because nåtya, dancing, and other similar manifestations of rati
magnify and demonstrate vibhäva, they are called anubhävas, resultant
manifestations of bhäva. 

“As pure transcendental bhäva manifests the eight sättvika-vikäras these are
called sattvika-bhävas. The various bhävas, which inject the thirty-three
symptoms beginning with nirveda into anubhäva-rati and vibhäva-rati and thus
breathe impetus and variegatedness into them, are known as the thirty-three
saïcäri-bhävas, simulative exciting ecstasies. Ultimately, the çuddha-bhaktas
and äcäryas have identified vibhäva as the root cause of bhakti. In truth, the
transcendental emotion of bhäva being productive of and equivalent to rati is a
subject of inconceivable nature and the arena of the purest form of bhakti.

“Scriptures such as the Mahäbhärata have deified bhäva as transcendentally pure
and spotless, enthroning it upon a pedestal beyond the jurisdiction of empirical
speculation and analysis. Therefore, the scriptures recommend that one not to
encroach upon this inconceivable knowledge through inductive philosophy and
rhetoric. Rati is the enchanting element in the paradigm of rasa; it colours
Kåñëa’s beauty, qualities and pastimes with the hues of vibhäva thus nourishing
vibhäva along with itself. Kåñëa’s beauty, qualities, and pastimes are the
mainstay of mädhurya-rasa. Initially, rati manifests the ecstatic beauty of
Kåñëa, and after the beauty has been relished, bhäva in its variegatedness turns
around and reciprocally enhances rati. Therefore, in conclusion, all the
divisions of bhäva—vibhäva, anubhäva, sattvika bhäva, and saïcäré (vyabhicäré)
bhäva—give support to rati, and vice versa.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, kindly explain to us the differences between kåñëa-rati,
loving attachment for Kåñëa, and viñaya-rati, attachment for material objects of
enjoyment.”

Gosvämé, “Viñaya-rati is worldly and gross; kåñëa-rati is supramundane and
purely spiritual. The roots of kåñëa-rati are in the extraordinary, in
transcendence. Worldly love is felt as pleasure when the lovers are united and
as pain when they are separated. When kåñëa-prema blossoms in the pure devotee’s
heart, rasa is churned up to produce nectarean bliss. In the mood of separation,
this bliss acquires wonderful nuances. During the conversation between Çré
Caitanya and Çréla Rämänanda Räya, the latter composed a poem in reply to the
question of Mahäprabhu. The poem, given in Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya-lélä,
8.194, describes the fascinating facets of vipralambha, bliss in separation, in
some detail. A whisper of grief is seemingly present in these lines, but in
reality they are descriptions of intense exultation.”

Vrajanätha, “The rhetoricians argue that manifest rasa is incomplete. What is
our answer to this assertion?”

Gosvämé, “Mundane rasa is indeed incomplete. In material rasa, favourable
material sämagré, ingredients, are necessary to nourish the material attachment
and emotion, which diminishes in their absence. However, transcendental
spiritual rasa is unparalleled, and when the devotee is on the stage of
siddha-avasthä, perfection, this rasa is uninterrupted, undiminished and
self-manifested. In the stage of sädhana spiritual rasa displays itself as a
reality perceivable from within the material world; however, spiritual rasa is
always rooted in transcendence and should never be mistaken to be a material
manifestation. Mundane rasa diminishes and disappears at the time of separation
of the lovers, whereas spiritual rasa continually shines brighter and brighter
in the vipralambha, mood of separation, of a renounced devotee. Transcendental
rasa is the effervescence of the majestic hlädiné-çakti and epitomizes Her
sublime characteristics and inconceivable potency of bliss. Hence, unmitigated
supreme happiness even in vipralambha is synonymous with supramundane rasa. In
conclusion, rasa cannot be comprehended by the mundane intellect, being
transcendental and inconceivable.” 

Vrajanätha, “How many spiritual rasas are there?” 

Gosvämé, “There is one mukhya-rati, which is divided into the five principal
rasas, plus the seven gauëa-rasas—thus making a total of eight.” 

Vrajanätha, “The more I hear about this topic, the thirstier I become to hear
more. What are these rasas?”

Gosvämé, “Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé writes in the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, 2.5.64:

mukhyas tu païcadhä çantaù prétaù preyäàç ca vatsalaù
madhuraç cety amé jïeyä yathä pürvam anuttamäù
hasyo ‘dbhutas tathä véraù karuëo raudra ity api
bhayänakaù sa vébhatsa iti gauëaç ca saptadhä

“‘The one principal rati of divine love is divided into the five principal
devotional rasas: çänta, neutrality, passivity; pritä, satisfaction and
servitude; preya, affection; vätsalya, protective indulgence; and mädhurya,
conjugality. Each succeeding rasa is increasingly superior to the preceding
rasa.’ 

hasyo ‘dbhutas tathä véraù
karuëo raudra ity api
bhayänakaù sa bébhatsa
iti gauëaç ca saptadhä

“‘There are seven subordinate rasas: häsya, humour; adbhuta, wonder; véra,
enthusiasm, chivalry; karuëa, mercy; raudra, wrath; bhayänaka, fear; and
bébhatsa, ghastliness.’ 

Vrajanätha, “What is the correct understanding of bhäva in the context of
spiritual cinmaya-rasa?”

Gosvämé, “Elevated, self-realized saints with one-pointed purified minds have
probed deeply into their innermost selves with the help of the science of bhakti
to release the transcendental loving emotions locked within. When these emotions
appear in the citta they are classified as bhäva within the spectrum of rasa. We
have discussed earlier that there are two varieties of bhäva: cintya-bhäva,
material and conceivable emotion; and acintya-bhäva, spiritual and inconceivable
emotion. Cintya-bhäva is a subject of debate and discussion, arising as it does
from within the limited arena of the intellect of the conditioned soul and is a
product of material nature and mundane religiosity.

“Cintya-bhäva remains materially sensual even if directed toward the Supreme
Lord. Factually, cintya-bhäva is improperly applied and incongruous in
relationship to the Supreme, because the Supreme Lord resides in the realm of
transcendence. However, it would be incorrect to conclude that transcendental
acintya-bhäva does not exist at all in relationship to the Supreme Lord only
because the Lord is situated in transcendence beyond the material sensuality of
cintya-bhäva. Actually, the entire gamut of transcendental bhäva is perfectly
compatible with the Supreme Lord and is a subject of acintya-bhäva as its play
is in the supramundane realm beyond the conditioned intellect.

“Acintya-bhäva will occupy the heart of a devotee only upon his sincere
invitation and is cultivated by single-minded çuddha-bhakti alone. In one’s
heart, one should remain rapt in meditation upon the sthäyi-bhäva and
sämagré-bhävas appropriate to oneself. In time, by sincere endeavour upon the
path of bhakti, one will realize acintya-bhäva. Only then can one evoke the
eternally perfect akhaëòa-rasa, unbroken incessant spiritual mellow, within
oneself that will lead one ever closer to Him.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, which gäòha-saàskära, profound impression, is relevant to
becoming ‘rapt in meditation’?”

Gosvämé, “My son, entangled by material nature, you have been caught in the
cycle of repeated births and deaths, working out the accrued reactions of your
karma. In this mechanism, two types of saàskära—präktana, of past lives, and
ädhunika, of the present life—have helped to frame your mental constitution,
temperament, and contemplations. Originally, your soul possessed a pure
consciousness and nature that have become polluted. However, now your previous
spiritually pious deeds have led you to seek saintly association and execute
devotional service thus forming a powerful new saàskära that will uproot the
polluted material saàskäras and gradually allow your original pure consciousness
to take its rightful place once more. The deeper the gäòha-saàskära of
devotional service sinks in, the stronger the presence of acintya-tattva will be
felt in the heart, thus causing you to become ‘rapt in meditation’ in your
sthäyi-bhäva.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, I am keen to understand what persons are worthy of
successfully fathoming rasa-tattva?”

Gosvämé, “Only those persons who are able to awaken acintya-bhäva by the
profound gäòha-saàskära of bhakti, as just described, are eligible candidates
for rasa-tattva. All others are barred. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé writes in the
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, 5.79:

vyatétya bhävanä-vartma
yaç camatkära-bhära-bhüù
hådi sattvojjvale bäòhaà
 svadate sa raso mataù

“‘On the basis of bhäva, sthäyi-bhäva is established like a monument of
breathtaking beauty and wonder. It is relished in a heart that is illuminated
and cleansed by pure goodness. This is rasa.’”

Vrajanätha, “Which persons are considered unfit for rasa? To instruct an unfit
person upon harinäma is a nämäparädha, similarly, to reveal the subtleties of
rasa to an undeserving person is a gross aparädha. Gurudeva, kindly prevent us
from doing so, as we are already in a lost condition.”

Gosvämé, “The practice of vairägya whilst rejecting çuddha-bhakti is in truth
phalgu-vairägya, false renunciation. Similarly, the pursuit of jïäna whilst
rejecting çuddha-bhakti is çuñka-jïäna, dry empirical mental speculation.
Kåñëa-bhakti-rasa is the greatest treasure of spiritual life and must be very
well protected from unworthy plunderers, just as valuable gems are always
carefully guarded from thieves. The phalgu-vairägés, show-bottle renunciants;
çuñka-jïänés, dry empiricists; phalgu-nyäyés, false rhetoricians; karmés,
fruitive workers; viñayés, gross sensual materialists; mäyävädés, impersonalists
and monists, are opposed to çuddha-bhakti and are thus amongst the unworthy.” 

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, we are so fortunate to hear these wonderful instructions
from you. We will try to follow them sincerely.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I maintain my family by reciting and lecturing on the Çrémad
Bhägavatam, which is actually a treatise on rasa. Is it therefore an aparädha to
earn money by reading Çrémad Bhägavatam to the ordinary public?”

Gosvämé, “Indeed! The Bhägavatam is an excellent text and the crown jewel of all
scriptures being the mature nectarean fruit of the entire Vedic literature.
Simply abide by its espousals, especially this particular verse of the Çrémad
Bhägavatam, 1.1.3: 

muhur aho rasikä bhuvi bhävukäù 

“‘O devotees who are thoughtful experts on the science of rasa, O devotees who
are the relishers of rasa, kindly continue even after liberation to savour the
sublime and nectarean fruit of the Vedas, known as the Çrémad Bhägavatam.’

“According to this edict, the only eligible candidates for rasa-tattva are the
devotees who are bhävuka, thoughtful and expert, and the rasikä, relishers of
rasa. No other person is permitted access. Therefore my son, immediately abandon
this method of earning your living. You are a thirsty searcher for rasa, do not
commit further aparädha against rasa-tattva. The Vedas, Taittiréya Upaniñad,
2.7, declare: …raso vai saù… ‘Rasa is personified in Kåñëa.’ The scriptures
offer several options for earning one’s living, follow their bona fide advice,
but stop lecturing and reading the Bhägavatam for monetary gain. If you find a
rasikä audience, certainly read the Bhägavata Puräëa to them with great
jubilation, but without expectation of taking a fee, a donation, etc.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, you have saved me from the clutches of a terrible
aparädha—but how shall I counter the aparädha I have already committed?”

Gosvämé, “That aparädha will not remain. Entreat rasa-tattva guilelessly, and
surely you will be exonerated from your aparädha. Do not worry about it any
longer.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I now feel that I should rather maintain this body by some
low profession than reveal the intricacies of rasa-tattva to an undeserving
person and wrongfully earn my living.”

Gosvämé, “Dear sons, you are blessed! Kåñëa has accepted you as His devotees,
otherwise how could you have developed so much determination in the culture of
bhakti! You are residents of Navadvépa-dhäma and Çré Gauräìga has mercifully
inspired you from within by His potency.” 

Thus ends the Twenty-eight chapter of the Jaiva-dharma entitled: Further
Consideration of Rasa-tattva, Part Two: Mukhya-rati, Principal Attachment

JDH 29: Further Consideration of Rasa-tattva

Chapter Twenty-nine
Further Consideration of Rasa-tattva

Part Three: The Rasas of Çänta, Däsya and Sakhya 

Vrajanätha and Vijaya-kumära decided to stay over in Jagannätha Puré for the
four months of the rainy season when the itinerant renunciants carry out the vow
of cäturmäsya during the rainy season. Eager to hear the intricate details of
rasa-tattva from Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé’s divine lips, they had determined to
remain longer in Puré and then embark upon the path of cultivating rasa after
taking such good instruction. When Vrajanätha’s grandmother heard about the
spiritual benefits of staying in Çré Jagannätha-kñetra during the time of the
cäturmäsya-vrata, she also agreed to Vrajanätha’s proposal to stay. Every
morning and evening, they visited the major temple to have darçana of Lord
Jagannätha. They bathed in the nearby holy ponds like the Narendra Sarovara Lake
and saw the important sacred places with great enthusiasm. They kept themselves
informed about Lord Jagannätha’s festivals and new outfit days and observed the
celebrations with devotion, keeping Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé regularly posted
on their activities and plans. 

Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé was extremely pleased with them, saying, “Vrajanätha,
Vijaya-kumära, I have developed a deep vätsalya affection for you, so much so
that I would feel your absence greatly, if you were to leave. I am extremely
happy that you are here. To find a bona fide spiritual teacher may be possible,
but sincere disciples are very rarely found.”

Humbled by Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé’s words and presence, Vrajanätha asked,
“Gurudeva, kindly explain to us the different rasas and their relation to the
different bhävas, such as vibhäva, which is basic cause of the appearance of
prema.”

Gosvämé, “Your enquiry is of a very elevated order. Please listen carefully, for
I speak only by the inspiration of Çré Caitanya. The beginning rasa is
çänta-rasa and the related sthäyi-bhäva is known as çänta-rati. The änanda
experienced in brahmänanda, impersonal Brahman realization, by the
nirviçeña-vädis, impersonalists, or the ätmänanda, bliss of the self,
experienced by the yogis steeped in meditation upon the inner self is weak in
comparison to the exultation felt in realization of Éça, the Supreme Lord. The
svarüpa of Éçvara, the Supreme Controller, is the source and cause of that
änanda. 

“The beatific transcendental form of the four-handed Çré Näräyaëa is the
supportive älambana of the çänta-rasa sentiment. Çré Näräyaëa is embellished
with absolute qualities such as omnipotence and opulence. Hence, these qualities
are prominent in the viñaya and anubhävas of this sthäyi-bhäva. Peaceful,
equipoised yogis take shelter of çänta-rati. Self-realized, liberated
transcendentalists who are ätmäräma and the elevated renunciants who possess
unflinching faith are in çänta-rasa. Foremost amongst the ätmärämas are the four
Kumäras—Sanaka, Sanätana, Sanat-kumära and Sanandana—who look like young boys
and dress in sannyäsé clothes. Initially realized in the nirviçeña-brahma, they
later became attached to the exquisite beauty of Çré Näräyaëa and began to
worship His personal form, the embodiment of transcendence. Renunciants whose
spiritual path has been cleared of impediments and who have cut off all material
attachments by the practice of yukta-vairägya, but who are still not able to
forsake completely the desire for mukti, enter into çänta-rasa. 

“The following are some of the uddépana in çänta-rasa: studying the principal
Upaniñads; living in solitary places; relishing the appearance of one’s
spirituality; discussing tattva, philosophical truths; establishing the
preponderance of the vidyä-çakti, which bestows knowledge and learning;
appreciating the viçvarüpa, the Universal Form of the Lord; associating with
devotees situated in jïäna-miçra-bhakti; and debating upon the Upaniñads with
persons of equal intellect and tendency. 

“Further uddépana in çänta-rasa are the fragrance of the tulasé buds offered at
the feet of the Lord; the sound of a conchshell; sacred mountains; holy forests;
siddha-kñetra, spiritually potent places; the River Gaìgä; the renunciation of
material attachments; and the conviction that Käla is the destroyer of
everything. Such are the vibhävas for tasting çänta-rasa.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the anubhävas in çänta-rasa?”

Gosvämé, “Vision fixed upon the tip of the nose; activities like that of an
avadhüta; eyes to the ground while walking; fondness for showing the
jïäna-mudrä; lack of antipathy against those who are inimical to the Supreme
Lord; paucity of devotion even for devotees favoured by the Lord; the desire to
sever all material ties and to become a jévan-mukta; impartiality; selflessness;
and material apathy. The extraordinary influences of this rati are freedom from
ahaìkära, false ego, and mamatä, possessiveness, and the taking of vows of
silence. Such are the anubhävas in çänta-rasa. The vikäras as result of the
anubhävas are yawning and stretching of the body, giving instructions on
devotion, offering obeisances to Çré Hari, and glorifying Him with prayers.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the sattvika-vikära, ecstatic transformations, in
çänta-rasa?” 

Gosvämé, “Nearly all the sattvika-vikära—such as romäïca, horripilation;
stambha, being stunned; and sveda, perspiration—frequently occur in çänta-rasa.
The exception is pralaya, devastation resulting in falling to the ground, which
is absent in çänta-rasa. Furthermore, sattvika-vikära with dépta-lakñaëa,
vigorously glowing symptoms, do not appear in çänta-rasa.” 

Vrajanätha, “What are the saïcäri-bhävas in this rasa?”

Gosvämé, “The most commonly seen saïcäri-bhävas in all categories of çänta-rasa
are nirveda, remorse; dhåti, patience; harña, smiling; mati, understanding;
småti, reminiscence; viçada, dejection; utsukau, eagerness; ävega, intense
emotion; and vitarka, argumentativeness.” 

Vrajanätha, “How many kinds of çänta-rati are there?”

Gosvämé, “Çänta-rati is the sthäyi-bhäva in çänta-rasa and is of two varieties:
samä, equipoised; and sändrä, concentrated. 

“In asamprajïäta-samädhi, when there is no longer any connection with mundane
pleasure and the yogi perceives the sphürti, manifestation, of Supreme Lord
within his heart, the body registers symptoms such as haåsa, smiling; käma,
desire; and romäïca, horripilation. This is how samä-çänta-rati is manifested. 

“In nirvikalpa-samädhi, one is completely free from all avidyä, nescience and
dualism. When the devotee sees the Supreme Lord face to face in this state of
samädhi, he experiences ineffable bliss known as sändränända, the hallmark of
sändra-çänta-rati. 

“Çänta-rasa may also be divided into pärokñya, indirect; and säkñätkära, direct.
Çukadeva Gosvämé and Bilvamaìgala Öhäkura had attained the nirviçeña-brahma
through jïäna, but they rejected the resultant brahmänanda for the
bhakti-rasänanda, immortal nectar of bhakti. The famous and most erudite
Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya, an associate of Çré Caitanya, is another example.”

Vrajanätha, “Why is çänta-rasa not mentioned in alaìkära, material rhetoric?”

Gosvämé, “In mundane relationships—the prime subject of mundane authors—the
state of çänta neutralizes all diversity and variegatedness, hence it is
overlooked. However, upon the plane of transcendence, apräkåta-rasa
progressively increases with the advent of çänta-rasa. Çré Bhagavän has declared
that the devotee’s consciousness is called samä, equipoised, if it is firmly
fixed upon Him. The fact is that one’s consciousness cannot be fixed upon the
Lord without çänta-rati; therefore, çänta-rasa must be cultivated and accepted
within the framework of cit-tattva, spiritual culture.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, the subject of çänta-rasa is now clear. Kindly explain
the intricacies of däsya-rasa.” 

Gosvämé, “Spiritual teachers also designate däsya-rasa as préta-bhakti-rasa,
pleasurable devotional mellow. The Lord’s servitors receiving His favour are of
two kinds: däsya, those who consider themselves His subordinate servitors; and
lälya, those who consider themselves personally maintained and watched over by
Him. Thus, préta-bhakti-rasa is divided into the two: sambhrama-préta-däsya,
respectful service; and gaurava-préta-däsya, the attitude of maintained
dependents.”

Vrajanätha, “Kindly elucidate sambhrama-préta-rasa?”

Gosvämé, “Sambhrama-préti, reverential affection, towards Vrajendranandana Kåñëa
appears in those devotees whose self conception is, ‘I am the servant of Kåñëa.’
As this préti progressively deepens, it manifests sambhrama-préta-rasa, the
mellow of reverential service. Kåñëa and His servants are the älambana of this
rasa.”

Vrajanätha, “What is the svarüpa of Kåñëa related to sambhrama-préta-rasa?”

Gosvämé, “Gokula Kåñëa in His original two-handed form is the object of
sambhrama-préta-rasa. However, additionally, as the object of this rasa, Kåñëa
may manifest His opulent two-handed form in some spiritual regions and in other
regions His opulent four-handed form. As the two-handed Kåñëa playing the flute
in Gokula, He wears a peacock feather in His crown and is dressed as a cowherd
boy. However, in other spiritual regions, the two-handed Kåñëa is dressed
opulently with ornaments and jewels. 

“In this regard, Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé writes in the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu,
Western Division 2.3.5: 

brahmäëòa koti dhämaika-roma-küpaù kåpämbudhiù
avicintya-mahäçaktiù sarva-siddhi-niñevitaù

avatärävalé béjaà sadätmäräma-håd-guëaù
éçvaraù paramärädhyaù sarva-jïaù sudåòha-vrataù

samåddhimän kñamä-çélaù çaraëägata-pälakäù
dakñiëaù satya-vacano dakñaù sarva-çubhaìkaraù

pratäpé dhärmikaù çästra-cakñur bhakta-suhåttamaù
vadänyas tejasä yuktaù kåta-jïaù kértti-saàçrayaù

varéyän balavän prema-vaçya ity ädibhir guëaiù
yutaç catur vidheñv eña däseñv älambano hariù 

“‘Çré Hari Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead embellished with
innumerable transcendental qualities, is the embodied älambana for the
bhakti-rasa tasted by the four kinds of däsya-bhaktas, respectful servitors. Çré
Hari Kåñëa is koöi-brahmäëòa-vigraha, the transcendental body wherein millions
of universes are lodged in every pore. He is kåpämbudhi, an ocean of compassion,
whose acintya-mahä-çakti, inconceivable awesome potency, is unfathomable by
human intellect. He is sarva-siddhi-niñevita, the repertory of all mystic
perfections and avatärävalé-béja, the primeval cause of all the varieties of
incarnation such as the guëa-avatäras, lélä-avatäras, and çaktyäveça-avatäras.
He is ätmäräma-gaëäkarñé, as He charms the ätmärämas, self-satisfied yogis,
including the most illustrious Çukadeva Gosvämé. He is the éçvara, who controls
and regulates everything and is thus paramärädhya, the Supreme Object of worship
for the jévas and devas alike. He is sarva-jïa, omniscient; sudådha-vrata,
infallible in His vow; samåddhimän, absolutely opulent; kñamä-çéla, forgiving;
and çaraëägata-pälaka, the protector of the devotees who have taken His shelter.
He is dakñiëa, the Supreme Icon of liberality and munificence; and satya-vacana,
as His words are always truth and never prove false. He is dakña, unlimitedly
expert; and sarva-çubhaìkara, as He always acts as everyone’s well-wisher and
benefactor. He is pratäpé, majestic and valorous; and dhärmika, the symbol of
religiosity. He is always çästra-cakñu, seeing through the eye of the
scriptures; bhakta-suhåt, the best friend of His devotees; vadänya, magnanimous;
tejasvé, radiant, influential, valorous and most powerful ; kåtajïa, grateful;
kértimän, famous; varéyän, the performer of wonderful deeds, superior to
everyone; balavän, the most powerful; and prema-vaçya, subjugated by the love of
His devotees.’”

Vrajanätha, “What are the four kinds of däsa?”

Gosvämé, “They are the adhikåta-däsa, qualified servants; äçrita-däsa, sheltered
servants; päriñada-däsa, constant trustworthy companions; and anugata-däsa,
obedient followers. Adhikåta-däsa indicates that the servitor is qualified for a
particular service to the Lord by always considering himself the property of his
master; this servitor always indulges his master and maintains a meek and humble
disposition before his Lord. An äçrita-däsa has the mood of having taken
complete shelter of his Lord and is always ready to fully execute his Master’s
orders. The päriñada-däsa is a constant companion and associate, trustworthy and
loyal. The submissive, affectionate anugata-däsa always considers his Lord as
Prabhu and is thus fully compliant to the desires of his Master.”

Vrajanätha, “Who are examples of the adhikåta-däsa?”

Gosvämé, “Lord Brahmä, Lord Çiva, Indra, the devas and devés, are adhikåta däsas
and däsés. Having earned the qualification for positions of authority in the
administration of the material cosmos, they serve the Supreme Lord in that
capacity.”

Vrajanätha, “Who are examples of äçrita-däsa?”

Gosvämé, “The äçrita däsa are of three kinds: çaraëägata, surrendered; jïäné,
enlightened; and sevä-niñöha, fixed in service. Käliya-näga and the kings who
were imprisoned by Jaräsandha are examples of çaraëägata däsa. The åñis headed
by Çaunaka discarded their aspiration for mukti and took devotional shelter of
the Supreme Lord, Çré Hari; thus, they are jïäna-niñöha-däsa, enlightened
servitors. Attached and dedicated from the very beginning to bhagavad-bhajana,
Candradhvaja, Harihara, Bahuläçva, Ikñväku, and Puëòaréka are sevä-niñöha däsa,
servitors absorbed in service.

Vrajanätha, “Who are examples of päriñada-däsa?”

Gosvämé, “Uddhava, Däruka, Sätyaki, Çrutadeva, Çatrujit, Nanda, Upananda, and
Bhadrä, etc., are päriñada däsa. Although they often offer advice and counsel,
they also render other appropriate services according to time and circumstance.
Bhéñma, Parékñit Mahäräja, and Vidura are also päriñada däsa. Uddhava is the
best amongst all the beloved päriñada-däsa of Kåñëa.”

Vrajanätha, “Who are the examples of anugata-däsa?”

Gosvämé, “Those servants whose hearts are always immersed in affectionate
service to Kåñëa are anugata-däsa. They are of two categories: those who reside
in Vraja-dhäma and those reside in Dvärakä-puré. In Vraja-dhäma, Raktaka is
their leader and there are Patraka, Patré, Madhukaëöha, Madhuvrata, Rasäla,
Suviläsa, Premakanda, Marandaka, Änanda, Candrahäsa, Päyoda, Bakula, Rasada, and
Çärada. In Dvärakä-puré, there are Sucandra, Maëòana, Stamba, and Sutamba.

“Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has explained that there are three types of päriñada däsa:
dhürya, topmost direct servant; dhéra, steadfast servant sheltered by Kåñëa’s
beloveds such as Satyabhämä; and véra, sheltered servant thus proudly
unconcerned about others. 

“Äçrita däsa are also of three types: nitya-siddha, eternally liberated; siddha,
having attained perfection; and sädhaka, a practitioner aspiring for
perfection.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the uddépana in däsya-rasa?”

Gosvämé, “The sweet sound of the flute; the sound of the çåìgé, horn; Kåñëa’s
smiling glance; hearing of Kåñëa’s wonderful qualities; the lotus flower; the
impressions of Kåñëa’s lotus feet; fresh dark blue rain-clouds; and Kåñëa’s
enchanting bodily fragrance are däsya-rasa uddépana.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the anubhävas in this rasa?”

Gosvämé, “To apply oneself fully to one’s designated duties; to carry out
Kåñëa’s orders; the abandonment of anger and envy to serve the Lord; the
fostering of warm camaraderie with Kåñëa’s servitors; to be faithful, steady and
dedicated in the service of Kåñëa are the specific anubhävas of däsya-rasa. The
udbhäsvaras, external symptoms of ecstasy, in this rasa and common to the other
rasas include dancing, feelings of respect and affection for Kåñëa’s servitors,
and indifference to everything outside the sphere of Kåñëa’s service.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the sattvika-vikäras present in the different kinds of
pritä-rasa?”

Gosvämé, “All the sattvika-bhävas beginning with stambha are present in this
rasa.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the vyabhicäré-bhävas of this rasa?”

Gosvämé, “Harña, smiling; garva, pride; dhåti, patience; nirveda, remorse;
viçada, dejection; dainya, humility; cintä, anxiety; småti, remembering; çaìkä,
doubt; mati, understanding; autsukya, eagerness; cäpalya, restlessness; vitarka,
argumentation; ävega, trepidation; hré, shame; vréòa, bashfulness; jäòya,
inertia; moha, delusion; unmäda, madness; avahitthä, hiding emotions; bodha,
perceptiveness; svapna, sleep; supti, state of dreaming; klama, fatigue; gläni,
a feeling that one is in a faulty position; vyädhi, sickness; and måti, yearning
for death, are the vyabhicäré bhävas in this rasa. 

“Mada, inebriety; çrama, fatigue; träsa, fear; apasmåti, absentmindedness;
älasya, indolence; augrya, volatility; krodha, anger; asüyä, jealousy and fault
finding; and nidrä, sleepiness, are very uncommon in pritä-rasa. 

“When meeting Kåñëa, harña, humour; garva, pride; and dhåti, forbearance, are
expressed. And, in separation from Kåñëa, gläni, a feeling that one is in a
faulty position; vyädhi, disease; and måtyu, death, are experienced. The other
eighteen bhävas, beginning with self-disparagement, are exhibited in union as
well as in separation from Kåñëa.” 

Vrajanätha, “Kindly elucidate the sthäyi-bhäva of pritä-rasa.” 

Gosvämé, “Deep feelings of awe and respect for Kåñëa, the Master, simultaneously
produce tremors in the heart and profound affection for Him. When these two
unite, préti, strong attachment, becomes the sthäyi-bhäva in this rasa. In
çänta-rasa, rati, attachment, alone is the sthäyi-bhäva; whereas, in pritä-rasa,
mamatä, deep affectionate possessive attachment, strengthens rati to form préti,
which then becomes the sthäyi-bhäva of this mellow. Préti mixed with sambhrama,
great respect, is sambhrama-préti, which is gradually refined into prema, love;
sneha, affection in love; and räga, deeply rooted love.

“As soon as sambhrama-préti sheds the mood of awe and reverence, it crystallizes
into prema. As prema further concentrates and causes the heart to melt, it is
known as sneha. In sneha, the devotee cannot bear to be separated from Kåñëa
even for a moment. When the devotee reaches that stage in sneha where sorrow and
grief are felt as happiness, the state of räga is achieved. In räga, separation
from Kåñëa evokes the wish to leave one’s body.

“The adhikåta däsa and äçrita däsa can only reach up to the stage of prema. The
päriñada däsa is able to achieve sneha. The vrajänuga-däsa—Kåñëa’s servitors in
the Vraja mood like Parékñit Mahäräja, Däruka, and Uddhava—are capable of
attaining räga. In tandem with the blossoming of räga, the first flush of
sakhya-rasa is also felt. 

“The learned paëòitas of bhakti-tattva state that in sakhya-rasa union with
Kåñëa is called yoga and separation from Kåñëa is called ayoga. Ayoga is divided
into two types: utkaëöhita, anxious yearning; and viyoga, separation. Yoga is of
three kinds: siddhi, perfect; tuñöi, satisfying; and sthiti, stable. When one
suddenly sees Kåñëa in the state of utkaëöhita, anxious yearning, caused by
separation, then siddhi-yoga takes place. Meeting Kåñëa after a period of
viyoga, separation, is called tuñöi-yoga, deeply satisfying. Living together
with Kåñëa is known as sthiti-yoga.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, we have understood sambhrama-préti, service in awe and
veneration; now kindly explain gaurava-préti, service in respectful affection.”

Gosvämé, “Those däsas who feel the pride of lälya-abhimäna, being personally
maintained and nourished by Kåñëa, are said to have gaurava-préti. However,
préti only progresses to gaurava when further nurtured by suitable sämagré, such
as vibhäva, anubhäva, etc. The Supreme Lord Çré Hari and His lälya-däsa, wards
and dependent servitors, are the älambana of gaurava-préti. The
viñaya-rüpa-älambana, supporting object, of gaurava-préti is Kåñëa as Mahäguru,
the great guru; Mahäkérti, the possessor of great fame; Mahäbuddhi, the
possessor of great intelligence; Mahäbala, the possessor of great power and
influence; Rakñaka, the infallible protector; and Kåñëa, the perfect maintainer.

“There are two varieties of lälya-däsa: kaniñöha, juniors; and putra, sons.
Säraëa, Gada and Subhadra are proud of being kaniñöha-däsa, whereas Pradyumna,
Cärudeñëa and Samba are proud of being Kåñëa’s putra-däsa. Kåñëa’s
vätsalya-bhäva, protective affection, consisting of smiling, merciful affection,
and so on, act as the uddépana of this rasa. 

“Some of the anubhävas manifested by the lälya-däsa immersed in gaurava-préti
are sitting at a lower level in the presence of Kåñëa; following in the
footsteps of their guru, Kåñëa; discarding independent and whimsical ways; and
so on. The saïcäri-bhävas and vyabhicäré-bhävas are as before as in
sambhrama-préti.”

Vrajanätha, “What is the meaning of the word gaurava?” 

Gosvämé, “A parental-filial relationship wherein Kåñëa is considered the father,
superior, or guru, based on one’s family or close affinity with Kåñëa, is the
understanding of gaurava. Gaurava-préti is the intense and affectionate
absorption in Kåñëa, seeing Him as one’s protector and maintainer, which is
therefore the sthäyi-bhäva of this rasa.” 

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, we have understood préti-rasa, which is also known as
däsya-rasa. Now kindly explain to us the nature of the preya-rasa-bhaktas, who
are in sakhya-rasa.’’ 

Gosvämé, “Çré Kåñëa, His friends and confidants, known as sakhäs, are the
älambana of this rasa. The two-handed flute-playing Vrajendranandana Kåñëa is
the viñaya-älambana, beloved relishable object, and Kåñëa’s sakhäs are the
äçrayä-älambana, receptacles of this mellow.” 

Vrajanätha, “What are the different types of friends and confidants and their
particular symptoms?”

Gosvämé, “In rüpa, form; guëa, qualities; and veña, dress; the friends and
confidants are similar to Kåñëa’s devotees in the däsya-rasa. Yet, unlike the
sambhrama-jïäna, awe and reverence, of the däsya-rasa devotees towards Kåñëa,
the sakhäs are related with Kåñëa through viçrambha-bhäva, which evokes trust,
confidentiality and a mood of equality. The sakhäs are engaged in many
activities, serving Kåñëa in various ways as friends full of the desire to
please Him. They are of two types: dvärakä-sambandha, related to Dvärakä; and
vraja-sambandha, related to Vraja. Arjuna, Bhéma, Draupadé, and Sudämä Vipra,
etc., are dvärakä-sambandha sakhä. Among them Arjuna is the closest to Kåñëa. 

“Kåñëa’s sakhäs in Vraja always desire to be in His company; they are intensely
eager to see Him, because Kåñëa is their very life and soul. Thus, they are the
principal sakhäs. The sakhäs of Vraja are of four kinds: suhåd-sakhä,
well-wishing friend; sakhä, friend; priya-sakhä, dear friend; and
priya-narma-sakhä, most intimate and confidential friend. 

“The suhåd-sakhäs possess a touch of the guardianship sentiment for Kåñëa. They
are slightly senior in age to Kåñëa and carry weapons to protect Kåñëa from harm
and from being attacked by enemies. Subhadra, Maëòalébhadra, Bhadravardhana,
Gobhaöa, Yakña, Indrabhaöa, Bhadräìga, Vérabhadra, Mahäguëa, Vijaya and
Balabhadra are suhåd-sakhäs. Among them, Maëòalébhadra and Balabhadra are most
prominent.

“The sakhäs are younger in age to Kåñëa; they possess a tinge of däsya-bhäva,
the mood of a servitor, but are fully in sakhya-rasa. Viçäla, Våñabha, Ojasvé,
Devaprastha, Varüthapa, Maranda, Kusumäpéòa, Maëibandha and Karandhama are some
of Kåñëa’s dearmost sakhä-sakhäs. Among the sakhäs, Devaprastha is the closest
to Kåñëa. 

“Kåñëa’s priya-sakhäs are equal in age to Him, and their mood towards Kåñëa is
pure unalloyed sakhya-bhäva, camaraderie and confidence. Çrédämä, Sudämä, Dämä,
Vasudämä, Kiìkiëi, Stoka-kåñëa, Aàçu, Bhadrasena, Viläsé, Puëòaréka, Viöaìka and
Kalaviìka are some of the eminent priya-sakhäs.

“The fourth kind of friends, priya-narma-sakhäs, are superior to the other
three. They are very intimate and confidential friends of Kåñëa and are most
flexible and many-sided in their relationship with Kåñëa. Subala, Arjuna,
Gandharva, Vasanta, and Ujjvala, are some of Kåñëa’s priya-narma-sakhäs.
Ujjvala, being very humorous and jovial, is always ready to crack jokes. 

“Amongst all these friends, who all love Kåñëa extremely, some are nitya-siddha,
eternal associates; some are sura-cara, promoted devas; and some are successful
and promoted sädhakas. In the mellow of friendship, they perform a wonderful
variety of services, adding great charm and beauty to the unlimited pastimes of
Çré Kåñëa.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the different uddépanas of this rasa?”

Gosvämé, “Kåñëa’s age, His boyish charm, horn, flute, conch, amusements,
jocularity, prowess, the effort of performing and helping in pastimes are the
uddépana in sakhya-rasa. Further uddépana are Kåñëa’s different ages: kumära,
childhood (one to five years); paugaëòa, when He takes the cows grazing (six to
fifteen years); and kaiçore, youth, when He resides in Gokula Vraja but leaves
for Mathurä (sixteen years).”

Vrajanätha, “What are the anubhävas that are common to all the various types of
Kåñëa’s sakhäs?”

Gosvämé, “Arm-wrestling, ball games, dice-playing, playing piggy-back, playing
with sticks, Kåñëa declares a wish and His friends compete to do it first,
sitting together on the same seat or swinging upon a swing together, joking and
chatting together, water sports, playing with monkeys, making music and dancing
are the anubhävas of all the sakhäs in general.

“The speciality of suhåd-sakhäs is to offer good advice and be always forward in
every activity. The sakhäs specialize in preparing chewing-betel, decorating
Kåñëa with tilaka, sandalwood pulp, and so on. The priya-sakhäs are known for
their bravery and often engage in sports and wrestling competitions with Kåñëa;
sometimes, they are victorious and receive medals and awards from Kåñëa. To
assist Kåñëa in the arrangements for His mädhurya-rasa pastimes is the
prerogative of priya-narma-sakhäs. Like Kåñëa’s däsa, they also decorate Kåñëa
with wild flowers, fan Him, and so on.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, what is the degree of the sattvika-bhävas and
saïcäri-bhävas in this rasa?”

Gosvämé, “They are slightly more pronounced here than in däsya-rasa.”

Vrajanätha, “What is the sthäyi-bhäva of this rasa?”

Gosvämé, “Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé writes in Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, Western Division
9.3.45: 

vimukta-sambhramä yä syäd viçrambhätmä ratir dvayoù
präyaù samänayor atra sä sakhyaà sthäyi çabda-bhäk 

“‘Viçrambha, the affectionate exchange between two equals which is devoid of the
elements of reverence and deference, but is full of love, trust, and confidence
is called sakhya-rasa, fraternal mellow. Thus, this is the sthäyi-bhäva in this
rasa.’”

Vrajanätha, “Kindly further elucidate the meaning of viçrambha?”

Gosvämé, “Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé explains viçrambha with these words in the
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, Western Division 9.3.46: 

viçrambho gäòha-viçväsa-viçeño yantraëojjhitaù 

“‘The acknowledgement of complete equality between two persons reflecting
unquestioning trust and confidentiality is known as viçrambha.’”

Vrajanätha, “Kindly describe the gradual progression of the levels of attachment
in this rasa.”

Gosvämé, “Sakhya-rasa is a matrix for prema, sneha, and räga, expanding all the
way up to praëaya.”

Vrajanätha, “What are the symptoms of praëaya in this rasa?”

Gosvämé, “Although capable of accommodating feelings of respect and deference,
praëaya is rati completely devoid of sambhrama, awe and reverence, even when
such an emotion may appear to be appropriate. Thus, sakhya-rasa is joyfully
magnificent. In pritä-rasa, the serving mellow, and vätsalya-rasa, the parental
mellow, Kåñëa and His devotees exhibit an understanding of unequal status in
their bhäva. However, that is absent in sakhya-rasa, which is also known as
preya-rasa; thus, sakhya-rasa is certainly greatly favoured amongst these rasas,
because in sakhya-rasa, Kåñëa and His devotees freely exchange the sweet bhäva
of unrestrained love in equality between one another.”

Thus ends the twenty-ninth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Further
Consideration of Rasa-tattva, Part Three: The Rasas of Çänta, Däsya and Sakhya

JDH 30: Further Consideration of Rasa-tattva

Chapter Thirty
Further Consideration of Rasa-tattva

Part Three: The Rasas of Vätsalya and Mädhurya

One day, after relishing khicuré prasädam, Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha went to
pay their respects at the samädhi of Çréla Haridäsa Öhäkura. Thereafter, they
proceeded for the auspicious darçana of Çré Öoöä Gopénätha, who resides
resplendently in the garden-like area in south Jagannätha Puré known as Öoöä.
Finally, they arrived at the Çré Çré Rädhäkänta temple. After offering
prostrated obeisances at Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé’s feet, they sat down.
However, soon Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé went away to take prasädam, so the two
seekers of rasa-tattva discussed various Kåñëa-conscious topics with Çré
Dhyänacandra Gosvämé. Upon his return, Çréla Gosvämé sat upon his äsana and
Vrajanätha felt inspired to humbly enquire about the details of vätsalya-rasa,
parental mellow.

Çréla Gosvämé started his elucidation, “In vätsalya-rasa, Çré Kåñëa is the
viñaya-älambana, principal objective, and His guru-jana, superior and elder
vrajaväsés, are the äçrayä-älambana, principal shelter. Kåñëa is the epitome of
beauty, dark complexioned, the reservoir of all auspiciousness, tender and
gentle, sweet in speech, guileless, bashful, humble, charitable, and respectful
to His elders. Kåñëa’s superiors are Vrajeçvaré Yaçodä Devi, Vrajeçvara Nanda
Mahäräja, Rohiëé Devé, the senior gopés, Devaké Devé, Kunté Devé, Çré Vasudeva,
Sändépané Muni, and so on. Yaçodä devé and Nanda Mahäräja are principal amongst
the seniors. The uddépanas in vätsalya-rasa are the different ages of Kåñëa as a
child, His beauty, His clothing as a child, His behaviour as a child, His
restlessness, His sweet words and talks as a baby, His joyful chuckling
laughter, and His sometimes mischievous pastimes, etc.” 

Vrajanätha, “What are the different anubhävas of this rasa?”

Gosvämé, “Smelling the top of Kåñëa’s head, gently squeezing and stroking His
body, blessing Him, pampering Him, protecting and maintaining Him, offering Him
good advice, are some of the anubhävas. The sädhäraëa, general, anubhävas in
this rasa are kissing, embracing, loudly calling Kåñëa by His pet names, and
restraining and chastising Him at appropriate moments.” 

Vrajanätha, “What are the sattvika-vikäras in this rasa?”

Gosvämé, “The eight regular transformations such as becoming stunned, ecstatic
trembling, tears of ecstasy, etc., are present, plus, unique to this rasa, the
outflow of breast-milk from the elder ladies. Thus, there are nine
sattvika-vikäras.” 

Vrajanätha, “What are the vyabhicäré-bhävas of vätsalya-rasa?”

Gosvämé, “All the vyabhicäré-bhäva symptoms of préta-rasa (däsya-rasa) that we
have described earlier plus mürchä, swoon, are manifest in vätsalya-rasa.” 

Vrajanätha, “What is the nature of the sthäyi-bhäva in this rasa?” 

Gosvämé, “In this rasa, the sthäyi-bhäva is benevolent love and kindness,
completely devoid of awe and reverence, given to the recipient of mercy. The
vätsalya-rati of elders such as Yaçodä devé is mature and matronly by nature. In
this rasa, the sthäyi-bhäva extends through prema and sneha to reach räga.

“Balaräma’s love for Kåñëa is a mixture of däsya-rasa and vätsalya-rasa.
Yudhiñöhira’s rasa is infused with vätsalya, däsya, and sakhya-rasa. Ugrasena’s
däsya-rasa is combined with vätsalya and sakhya-rasa. Nakula, Sahadeva, and
Närada exhibit a combination of sakhya and däsya-rasa. The bhävas of Lord Çiva,
Garuòa, Uddhava and many others also exhibit an amalgamation of däsya and
sakhya-rasa.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, we have understood the magnificence of vätsalya-rasa.
Kindly purify and enliven us with a description of the paramount of all rasas,
mädhurya-rasa, the sweet conjugal mellow.”

Gosvämé, “Mädhurya-bhakti-rasa has been designated the mukhya-bhakti-rasa, the
principal of all devotional mellows. The fallen conditioned jéva has taken
shelter of the material rasa; however, when he turns to Éçvara and nitya-dharma,
he naturally embraces material detachment. Yet, until he acquires the
qualification to engage in cid-rasa, transcendental mellow, he is certainly
excluded from the perception of mädhurya-rasa. Mädhurya-rasa by nature is most
esoteric and rare. Scarcely anyone is found to be an eligible candidate; hence,
mädhurya-rasa must be kept very confidential. Therefore, although mädhurya-rasa
is a very extensive subject, I will be brief and only describe the salient
features.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, I am a follower of the cowherd boy, Çré Subala, so I
understand that you will consider how much I can hear and understand about
mädhurya-rasa.”

Gosvämé, “The priya-narma-sakhäs are permitted to participate in the léläs of
mädhurya-rasa, also known as çåìgära-rasa, to an extremely restricted degree.
Keeping that in mind, I will reveal what is appropriate to your eligibility—not
more.”

Vrajanätha, “Who are the älambana of this rasa?”

Gosvämé, “Çré Kåñëa is the viñaya-älambana of this rasa. He is the nägara,
epitome of unparalleled beauty, charm and amorous pastimes. The gopés of Vraja
are the äçraya-älambana in mädhurya or çåìgära-rasa. Amongst all the gopés,
Çrématé Rädhikä is the crest jewel. The sound of Kåñëa’s muralé, flute, is a
primary uddépana in this rasa. Sidelong glances and enigmatic smiles are some of
the anubhävas in mädhurya-rasa. The entire range of sättvika-bhävas manifest in
their fullness in mädhurya-rasa, and except for älasya, laziness, and augrya,
rudeness and volatility, all the other vyabhicäré-bhävas are also displayed in
this rasa.” 

Vrajanätha, “What is the nature of the sthäyi-bhäva in this rasa?”

Gosvämé, “When mädhurya-rati is nurtured by the natural vibhäva, loving impetus,
of the heart, it blossoms into mädhurya-rasa. This divine love for Çré Rädhä and
Çré Kåñëa finds no viccheda, obstruction, being without dependence upon bhävas
that are svajätéya, compatible; and being undiminished by bhävas that are
vijätéya, incompatible.”

Vrajanätha, “How many types of mädhurya-rasa are there?”

Gosvämé, “Vipralambha, love in separation, and sambhoga, love in union, are the
two types of mädhurya-rasa.”

Vrajanätha, “What is vipralambha?”

Gosvämé, “Vipralambha has many subdivisions such as pürva-räga, mäna, and
praväsa.” 

Vrajanätha, “What is pürva-räga?” 

Gosvämé, “The feelings and emotions that lovers experience before meeting each
other are called pürva-räga.” 

Vrajanätha, “What are mäna and praväsa?”

Gosvämé, “Mäna is well-known as the hurt pride and pique of the lover, and
praväsa means to be bereft of the lover’s presence.”

Vrajanätha, “What is sambhoga?”

Gosvämé, “Sambhoga is the inexplicable exultation that arises as the lover and
beloved meet. I will now abstain from revealing more about mädhurya-rasa. Those
elevated souls who are eligible to engage in the esoteric science of
mädhurya-bhakti-rasa, may refer to the book Çré Ujjvala-nélamaëi of Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé.” 

Vrajanätha, “Kindly explain briefly the different varieties of
gauëa-bhakti-rasa, subordinate devotional mellows.” 

Gosvämé, “Häsya, amusement; adbhuta, wonder; véra, chivalry; karuëa, pity;
raudra, anger; bhayänaka, terror; and vébhatsa, horror, are the seven
subordinate rasas. When they gain prominence and intensity to the extent of
usurping the positions of the mukhya-rasa, principal mellow, they assert
themselves as individual rasas. At the stage when they are able to express
themselves independently they become the sthäyi-bhäva, and when nurtured by the
inherent vibhäva they are converted to full-fledged rasas. Actually there are
only five mukhya-rasas—çänta, däsya, sakhya, vätsalya, mädhurya—and these seven
gauëa-rasas generally fall within the category of vyabhicäré-bhäva.” 

Vrajanätha, “While studying rasa-vicära within the alaìkära-çästra, I came
across the seven gauëa-rasas. I would really like to know the interrelationships
between the mukhya-rasas and these gauëa-rasas.” 

Gosvämé, “I will enumerate the different combinations of compatible and
incompatible rasas. 

“Çänta-rasa is amicable to däsya, vébhatsa, dharma-véra, dedication to religious
performances, and adbhuta-rasa. 

“On the other hand, adbhuta-rasa is friendly to däsya, sakhya, vätsalya, and
mädhurya-rasa. 

“The enemies of çänta-rasa are mädhurya, yuddha-véra, raudra, and bhayänaka. 

“Däsya-rasa is congenial to vébhatsa, çänta, dharma-véra, and däna-véra-rasa;
its opponents are mädhurya, yuddha-véra, and raudra-rasa.

“Sakhya-rasa is friendly to mädhurya, häsya, and yuddha-véra-rasa; it is
unfriendly to vätsalya, vébhatsa, raudra, and bhayänaka-rasa. 

“Vätsalya-rasa concurs with häsya, karuëa, and bhayänaka-rasa, but disagrees
with mädhurya, yuddha-véra, däsya, and raudra-rasa. 

“Mädhurya-rasa is compatible with häsya and sakhya-rasa and incompatible with
vätsalya, vébhatsa, çänta, raudra, and bhayänaka-rasa.

“Häsya-rasa harmonizes with vébhatsa, mädhurya, and vätsalya-rasa, but is
incongruent with karuëa, and bhayänaka-rasa. 

“Adbhuta-rasa compliments véra, çänta, däsya, sakhya, vätsalya, and mädhurya,
but resists häsya, sakhya, däsya, raudra, and vébhatsa-rasa. 

“Véra-rasa is friendly to adbhuta, häsya, sakhya, and däsya-rasa, but inimical
to bhayänaka-rasa. Some are of the opinion that çänta-rasa is also inimical to
véra-rasa. 

“Karuëa-rasa coordinates well with raudra and vätsalya-rasa, but not with véra,
häsya, sambhoga-mädhurya, and adbhuta-rasa. 

“Raudra-rasa is in harmony with karuëa and véra-rasa, but not with häsya,
mädhurya, and bhayänaka-rasa.

“Bhayänaka-rasa, mixes well with vébhatsa and karuëa-rasa, but opposes véra,
mädhurya, häsya, and raudra-rasa. 

“Vébhatsa-rasa is congruent with çänta, häsya, and däsya-rasa, but incongruent
with çåìgära and sakhya-rasa. 

“All the other rasas are taöastha, neutral, to one another.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurujé, what are the results when the different rasas mingle?”

Gosvämé, “When compatible rasas mingle the result is greatly relishable. The
best result is gained when the aìga, limbs, link up with aìgé, body. The
criterion is not whether the rasas are mukhya, principal, or gauëa, subordinate,
but that the aìgé-rasas, central ‘body’ mellows, combine with compatible rasas
that may harmoniously become their aìga, associated compatible limbs.”

Vrajanätha, “Kindly define the difference between rasas that are designated as
either aìgé or aìga.” 

Gosvämé, “Again the consideration whether the rasa to be designated as either
aìgé or aìga is a mukhya or gauëa rasa is not the conclusive element. The rasa
that prevails for the moment over all others is the aìgé-rasa and those rasas
that nourish that aìgé-rasa are called the aìga-rasas and they thus take on the
role of saïcäri-bhävas. 

“In this regard, the Viñëu-dharmottara states:

rasänäà samavetänäà yasya rüpaà bhaved bahu
sa mantavyo rasaù sthäyé çeñäù saïcäriëo matäù

“‘When several rasas become simultaneously active, the most outstanding is
considered a sthäyi-rasa, while the others are designated saïcäri-bhävas.’”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, how does a gauëa-rasa obtain the position of an
aìgé-rasa?”

Gosvämé, “Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé in the Northern Division, Eight Wave, Verses 46-50,
of the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu states:

pradyan vibhävanotkarñät puñöià mukhyena lambhitaù
kuïcatä nija-näthena gauëo’py aìgitvam açnute 

“‘Sometimes, mukhya-rasa, the protagonist primary mellow, prefers a saìkoca,
withdrawn, mood, and nourishes the gauëa-rasa, subordinate mellow, and,
simultaneously, vibhäva, the impetus of love, becomes strongly manifest. Then,
gauëa-rasa wears the crown of an aìgé-rasa. Meanwhile, mukhya-rasa slips into
the role of an aìga-rasa and cloaks her own magnificence. Just as Vämana
supported Indra, similarly mukhya-rasa acting as an aìga nurtures gauëa-rasa,
now turned aìgé.’

mukhyas tv aìgatvam äsädya puñëann indram upendravat
gauëam eväìginaà kåtvä nigüòha-ìija-vaibhavaù

“‘Yet, mukhya-rasa always shines resplendently in the heart of the devotee
saturated with bhakti, which is scented with the sublime fragrance of endless,
transcendental desire to serve the Lord, unlike the gauëa-saïcäri-rasas, which
appear on occasion and then eventually merge away into the mukhya-rasa as they
becomes wanton vyabhicäré-bhävas. Thus, mukhya-rasa ultimately remains firm and
preponderant.’

anädi-väsanodbhäsa väsite bhakta-cetasi
bhäty eva na tu lénaù syäd eva saïcäri-gauëavat

“‘Certainly, mukhya-aìgé-rasa allows herself to be garnished by svajätéya-aìgas,
compatible mellows, and vijätéya-aìgas, incompatible mellows, to form a
conglomerate of bhävas, transcendental emotions; however, ultimately, she,
mukhya-aìgé-rasa, asserts her independence and predominance.’ 

aìgé-mukhyaù svam aträìgair bhävais tair abhivarddhayan
svajätéyair vijätéyaiù svatantraù sann viräjate

“‘One who is attracted to a particular mukhya-rasa becomes eternally imbued and
ensconced in her, which is thus manifested as the aìgé-rasa. All other rasas,
even the other mukhya-rasas, are relegated to the position of aìga in relation
to one’s essential mukhya-aìgé-rasa.’

yasya mukhyasya yo bhakto bhaven nitya-nijäçrayaù
aìgé sa eva tatra syän mukhyo’py anyo ‘ìgatäà vrajet

“‘Another relevant point is that only when the aìga-rasas flow harmoniously with
the aìgé-rasa, thus enhancing the relish of rasa, can one actually speak of
aìga-rasas; otherwise, discussion of an unproductive alliance of aìga-rasas with
the aìgé-rasa is contradictory and meaningless.’” 

Vrajanätha, “What happens when contrary rasas flow together?”

Gosvämé, “Then a tasteless, unpleasant rasa is created, similar to a concoction
of deliciously sweet nectar with salty, acid liquids. Such a distasteful mixture
is called rasäbhäsa, incompatible conflicting mellows.”

Vrajanätha, “Is this mixture of rasäbhäsa not relishable under any
circumstance?”

Gosvämé, “Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé gives an answer in the Northern Division, Eight
Wave, Verses 63-64, in his Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu: 

dvayor ekatarasyeha bädhyatvenopavarëane
smaryyamäëatayäpy uktau sämyena vacane ‘pi ca
rasäntareëa vyavadhau taöasthena priyeëa vä
viñayäçraya-bhede ca gauëena dviñatä saha
ity ädiñu na vairasyaà vairiëo janayed yutiù 

“‘The mixing of two contrary rasas does not produce virasatä, a conflict in
taste, in the following situations: when one logically describes the
pre-eminence of one contrary rasa of the two that have mingled, and thereby
reveals the inferiority of the other rasa; or when one describes an incompatible
rasa in recollection; or when one dispassionately describes a particular
similarity between the incompatible rasas; or when a taöasthä-rasa, neutral
mellow, or preya-rasa, friendly mellow, intervenes between the incompatible
rasas; or when there is divisive conflict between the viñaya, the object of
love, and the äçrayä, resting place of love, at the time of mixing of the
incompatible gauëa-rasa and mukhya-rasa.’ 

“Another interesting feature is when a single devotee manifests däsya and
vätsalya at different times, as in devotees such Mahäräja Yudhiñöhira. Thus, two
mutually incompatible rasas generally never manifest together at the same time.
However, in the stage of adhirüòha mahäbhäva, the highest state of spiritual
love, even if there is an arising confluence of all the opposing rasas, still
rasäbhäsa is not generated.” 

“Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé further explains in Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, Northern Wave,
Eight Division, verse 57:

kväpy acintya-mahäçakatau mahäpuruña-çekhare
rasävali-samäveçaù svädäyaivopajäyate

“‘In some rare cases, crest jewel mahä-puruña devotees endowed with
inconceivable mahä-çakti, divine potency, experience a simultaneous confluence
of contrary rasas that only serves to enhance their extraordinary rapture in
relishing rasa.’”

Vrajanätha, “I have heard from the lips of learned Vaiñëavas that Çré Caitanya
Mahaprabhu strongly denounced rasäbhäsa, to the extent that He refused to hear
any composition that was corrupted by rasäbhäsa. So far I have been told the
numerous discrepancies of rasäbhäsa—may I also hear of the different varieties
of rasäbhäsa?”

Gosvämé, “When a mixture of mellows is incompatible and defective, it is defined
as rasäbhäsa. There are three varieties of rasäbhäsa: uparasa, anurasa, and
aparasa, which are graded respectively: uttama, major; madhyama, intermediate;
and kaniñöha, minor.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, kindly explain uparasa.”

Gosvämé, “Sthäyi-bhäva, vibhäva, anubhäva, etc., which are responsible for
creating the twelve rasas—çänta, däsya, etc., and häsya, adbhuta, etc.,—may
assume the status of uparasa. This is caused when the sthayi-bhava, vibhäva, or
anubhäva become virüpitä, disfigured, by the imposition of a further dissonant
rasa.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, kindly explain anurasa.”

Gosvämé, “When the secondary rasas, beginning with häsya, are manifest by a
person who at that time has taöasthä-bhäva, neutral emotion, towards Kåñëa, they
are designated as anurasa. If véra, chivalrous emotion, is manifested by
personalities only distantly associated with Kåñëa, this may also be designated
anurasa.”

Vrajanätha, “Gurudeva, how can such an emotion be designated as rasa when it
arises in the heart of someone who is distant from Kåñëa? Surely, at best, such
sentiment is gross mundane rasa. Why then is such sentiment called anurasa?”

Gosvämé, “Rasas that do not have a direct and personal connection with Kåñëa are
anurasas; for example, the laughter of the gopés upon seeing the prancing and
pranks of the pet monkey of Çrématé Rädhäräëé, Kakkhaöé. Çréla Närada Muni
expresses adbhuta, wonder, when he hears the parrots in Bhäëòéravana discussing
Vedänta philosophy. Certainly, there is a slight and distant connection with
Kåñëa, but not a direct one. This is anurasa.” 

Vrajanätha, “What is aparasa?”

Gosvämé, “In a situation where Kåñëa is the viñaya, object, of häsya-rasa,
laughter, etc., and His enemies are the äçraya, shelter or enjoyers of this
rasa, then such häsya-rasa, etc., are called aparasa. The repeated derisive
laughter of Jaräsandha upon seeing the flight of Kåñëa is aparasa. 

“Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé writes in the Northern Division, Ninth Wave, verse 21, of
his book Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu:

bhävä sarve tad-äbhäsä rasäbhäsäç ca kecana
amé proktä rasäbhijïaiù sarve’pi rasanäd rasäù 

“‘Some persons refer to the entire spectrum of such bhävas as tad-äbhäsa and
others as rasäbhäsa. However, the expert realized scholars of rasa designate any
transcendental bhäva evoking divine bliss as rasa.’”

The effect of the analysis of rasa was so overpowering upon Vrajanätha and
Vijaya-kumära that they both fell to the ground. Their eyes brimming with
unrestrained tears, they could simply repeat in gratitude: 

oà ajïäna-timirändhasya
jïänäïjana-çaläkayä
cakñur unmélitaà yena
tasmai çré-gurave namaù 

“‘I humbly worship my spiritual master who has applied the salve of
transcendental knowledge upon my eyes and thus extirpated the five severe layers
of material nescience, which are: ignorance about the jéva’s real spiritual ide
tity; false identification of the body as the self; assumed false proprietorship
over matter as her master and enjoyer; attachment to material conceptions and
objects in forgetfulness of their actual relationship with Kåñëa and thus
absorption in material duality; and the resultant fear, antagonism, and
distorted perception of material bewilderment. Timirändhasya, the darkness of
ignorance, in the form of striving for the four Vedic goals—dharma, artha, käma,
and mokña—stems from these five layers of nescience. Mercifully, the guru opens
the spiritual vision of the jéva and makes him fixed in devotional service to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.’”

Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé bent down, raised the prostrate forms of Vrajanätha
and Vijaya-kumära and firmly embraced them. He showered unreserved blessings
upon his disciples, exclaiming, “May the beacon of rasa-tattva light up your
hearts!” 

Thereafter, Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha made daily visits to the Rädhäkänta
temple and engrossed themselves in spiritual discussions with Çré Dhyänacandra
Gosvämé. Drinking the caraëämåta and eating the nectarean prasädam from the lips
of Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé became an eagerly awaited daily ritual for them. On
different days, they would visit the various holy spots of Puré such as the
bhajana-kuöéra and samädhi-mandira of Çréla Haridäsa Öhäkura, the Siddha-bakula
tree, the Çré Öoöä Gopénätha Mandira, and so on. At these places, they observed
the different techniques of many Vaiñëavas in chanting harinäma, and their own
quality of chanting was enriched by these examples. 

Furthermore, they were very attracted to visiting the places of Çré Caitanya’s
pastimes, as described in the Stavävalé and Stavamälä, and experienced
transcendental bhäva in this way. Whenever they saw çuddha-vaiñëavas performing
kértana, they joined in. Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha were gradually advancing
in chanting and çuddha-bhakti. 

One day, Vijaya-kumära considered, “Çréla Gosvämé has given a very brief account
of mädhurya-rasa. Vrajanätha is attracted to sakhya-rasa; however, I am
definitely inclined to mädhurya-rasa and feel the urge to ask Gurudeva for
further details of this topic. At a suitable time, when we are alone, I shall
put further enquires.” At the request of Vijaya-kumära, Çré Dhyänacandra Gosvämé
kindly gave a copy of the book Ujjvala-nélamaëi, which is a great exposition
upon mädhurya-rasa. Vijaya-kumära enthusiastically delved into the book, going
to Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé for clarification whenever doubts arose. 

Sitting on the beach one evening watching the endless waves of the ocean,
Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha mused that life was like those waves, a continuum
of unknown future events. Who could predict the future? Therefore, the best
course of action was to immediately learn the process of räga-märga bhajana, the
path of cultivating spontaneous attraction in devotional worship, from Çréla
Gopäla-guru Gosvämé. Vrajanätha commented, “I have seen the devotional process
that Çré Dhyänacandra Gosvämé has propounded in his bhajana-paddhati notebook—I
think we should emulate that process. If we could make copies and receive more
esoteric instructions upon that process from our beloved Gurudeva, then we shall
surely get good results.” 

This decision having been made, Vrajanätha humbly approached Çré Dhyänacandra
Gosvämé to make copies of his handwritten notes on the process of his bhajana,
but Dhyänacandra said, “Without the permission of Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé, I
am not in a position to give copies.” Vrajanätha and Vijaya-kumära then
approached Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé about this, to which he consented, saying
that they should come to him with the notes for clarification. After requesting
and receiving copies from Çré Dhyänacandra Gosvämé, Vijaya and Vrajanätha
decided to read the notes meticulously and to consult Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé
about their esoteric aspects at every stage. 

Çré Dhyänacandra Gosvämé was a great paëòita, well versed in all scriptures. His
specialty, however, was the profound methodology of the Vaiñëava science of
bhajana in which he was the foremost of the disciples of Çréla Gopäla-guru
Gosvämé. Considering them well qualified, Çré Dhyänacandra Gosvämé tutored
Vijaya and Vrajanätha in all the esoteric aspects of räga-märga bhajana.
Whenever doubts arose, Vijaya and Vrajanätha humbly approached Çréla Gopäla-guru
Gosvämé for clarification. Having understood the divine attributes of Çré
Caitanya and having grasped the transcendental essence of the pastimes of Çré
Kåñëa, Vijaya and Vrajanätha joyfully entered the path of añöa-käléya bhajana,
devotional meditation upon eternal pastimes of the Supreme Lord throughout the
eight time divisions of the day. 

Thus ends the thirtieth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Further Consideration
of Rasa-tattva, Part Three: The Rasas of Vätsalya and Mädhurya

JDH 31: Mädhurya-rasa, The Supremely Sweet Conjugal Mellow, Part One

Chapter Thirty-one
Mädhurya-rasa, The Supremely Sweet Conjugal Mellow, Part One

As the days went by the dark thunderclouds of the rainy season were being
replaced by the white fleecy clouds of autumn. One night cooling moonbeams
spread a silvery sheen like a beautiful sari over Mother Earth. In his room,
Vijaya-kumära was lost in reading the Ujjvala-nélamaëi. On account of his
immersion in mädhurya-rasa, he was now only attracted to the pastimes of Kåñëa
in Vraja, especially His tender and loving exchanges with the gopés of
Våndävana. He glanced out of the window and beheld the nocturnal grandeur of
Puré. It was now ten o’clock, and he felt inspired to visit Sundaräcala. He had
heard that Çré Caitanya always felt that He was in Vraja-dhäma each time He
visited Sundaräcala.

So Vijaya-kumära left and wandered alone to Sundaräcala. As he walked past
Balagaëòé and along Çraddhäbälé, the purple woods on either side directly
manifested Våndävana-dhäma. Suddenly, Vijaya-kumära felt weightless, as if
floating in sublime exhilaration. He said, “O how fortunate I am to actually see
Vraja-dhäma! A rare sight indeed, even for Lord Brahmä, the universal creator.
Ah! There lies the kuïja-vana, forest groves! Within the leafy bowers of
intoxicating, scented mädhavé-mälaté blossoms and mädhuré creepers, our beloved
Lord of the heart, Kåñëa, is talking wittily with the gopés.”

Feeling not a trace of fear or awe, Vijaya-kumära eagerly hastened to the
kuïja-vana. However, after a few steps he faltered and, overcome by intense
spiritual emotions, fell swooning to the ground. Soon awakened by the kind
service of a gentle caressing breeze, Vijaya glanced around anxiously. However,
he could no more see the kuïja-vana, the gopés, and his beloved Lord, so feeling
desolate and deeply afflicted he slowly returned home. Without speaking to
anyone, he silently lay down to sleep. 

The transcendental vision of the Lord’s vraja-kuïja-lélä in the woods had set
his heart aglow with divine ecstasy, and he thought, “Tomorrow, I shall relate
this mystical incident to Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé.” However then he hesitated,
remembering the instruction that the apräkåta-lélä, unmanifest transcendental
pastimes, were seen by immense good fortune and should not be disclosed to
anyone. With these thoughts, he gradually drifted into a peaceful slumber. When
he awoke the next morning, his heart was preoccupied with memories of his vision
the night before. 

“After noon prasädam, Vijaya went to the Rädhäkänta Mandira, where he offered
his prostrate obeisances to Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé. Being very pleased to see
him, Çréla Gosvämé embraced him and had him sit down and relate his devotional
progress. Burdened with questions about mädhurya-rasa, Vijaya-kumära immediately
felt the calming effect of his guru’s presence as he began, “Gurudeva, I am very
thankful to you for your unlimited patience and mercy. I beg permission to
enquire about certain esoteric aspects of the Ujjvala-nélamaëi that are beyond
my grasp.” 

Çré Gopäla-guru Gosvämé answered, “Vijaya, you are my beloved disciple, feel
free to ask any questions you wish and know that I shall always try to answer as
best I can.”

Vijaya continued, “Dearest Gurudeva, mädhurya-rasa has been praised as the most
excellent amongst the mukhya-rasas and as capable of evoking the most
extraordinary bhäva and rasa. This is so because all the supramundane attributes
of çänta, däsya, sakhya and vätsalya are eternally reposed within mädhurya-rasa.
Moreover, any wonderful qualities that the other rasas may lack shine with full
glory and sublime splendour in mädhurya-rasa. Thus, how can anyone question the
paramount position of mädhurya-rasa? 

“For those on the impersonal path of nivåtti-märga, austerity and renunciation,
the pursuit of mädhurya-rasa is inappropriate, because their hearts are as dry
as a desert. On the other hand, for the hedonists a non-sensual and
non-materialistic goal is incomprehensible, therefore the mädhurya-rasa of
Vraja, categorically opposed to mundane lust and enjoyment, is simply beyond
their grasp. What I cannot understand is that such a supramundane divine rasa
should ostensibly be exhibited as similar to the shameful and despicable
exchanges between men and women of the material world?” 

Gosvämé, “Son, you know that the variegatedness of the mundane plane is a mere
reflection of the variegatedness in the transcendental realm. In fact, this
material world simply mirrors the spiritual world. The mystical truth is that
the reflected image is reversed and inverted. Therefore, the best and highest in
the original spiritual realm is the worst and lowest in the reflected image that
is the material realm. Conversely, the lowest in the spiritual world is the
superior most in the material reflection. A good example is that when one stands
in front of a mirror, all the limbs of one’s body are shown in reverse.

“The Supreme Being, the Absolute Truth, by His acintya-çakti has projected
Himself as the reflection of His own potency, thus diffusing Himself in the
material nature. Therefore, mundane nature is endowed with the attributes
opposite to those in the absolute realm. In the mundane world rasa is a
diametrically inverted version of the rasa in the transcendental world. 

“The sublime rasa reposed in the Supreme Lord is His magnificent variegatedness
of ecstasy. When this sublime rasa is reflected upon the mundane plane, the
materially conditioned souls impose mundane designations and qualities upon this
supreme rasa. In this state of confusion, they decide that all the manifest
variegatedness is mundane and consider that the Absolute Truth must be opposite
in nature and therefore nirviçeña, featureless and formless. Thus, they,
especially the rhetoricians and empiricists, mistakenly conclude that the
Supreme Lord’s partial manifestation of the impersonal Brahman is the highest
aspect of the Supreme Absolute Truth. This wrong conclusion that variegatedness
is essentially temporary and mundane impedes their understanding of the
existence and nature of the Supreme Absolute Person and exposes the limitations
of logic in the attempt to understand the Absolute Truth.

“In fact the parama-vastu, Supreme Absolute Being, is the embodiment of rasa,
mellow, and rüpa, beauty. He is therefore the repository of the wonderful
variety that is reflected as the perverted rasa of the mundane plane. Actually,
this astonishing mundane variegatedness should lead us to infer the existence
and nature of an absolute transcendental rasa beyond the material senses.
However, mundane variegatedness can give us but a poor semblance of spiritual
rasa, the latter being composed in a totally different way.

“In the spiritual world, çänta-rasa, a spiritual mellow characterized by
dispassionate temperament and neutrality of feelings, is on the lowest rung of
the rasa gradation. Above çänta-rasa are däsya, sakhya, vätsalya, and
mädhurya-rasa, consecutively. However, through the principle of reflection,
mädhurya-rasa, the topmost rasa in the spiritual world, is the bottommost on the
mundane plane. Similarly, in the mundane plane, vätsalya is above mädhurya, then
come sakhya, däsya, and finally on top is çänta-rasa. Therefore, those whose
conclusions are based on the nature of this material plane misconstrue the
activities of the transcendental mädhurya-rasa by incorrectly considering it as
equivalent to mundane rasa and therefore degraded and low.

“Actually, in the spiritual world mädhurya-rasa is resplendent in divine purity,
forever embellished in pristine, extraordinary magnificence and sweetness. On
the transcendental plane, Kåñëa’s exchanges with His consorts are the exchanges
between the divine puruña, Enjoyer, and the divine prakåti, enjoyed, and are
therefore absolutely sanctified and metaphysical. Exchanges between the men and
women of the material plane based on mundane relationships are certainly
blemished and shameful, but there is no equivalent transgression of innate
dharma on the transcendental platform because in purest conclusion of tattva
Kåñëa is the only puruña and His devotees are all prakåti by nature.

“Since in the material world both the enjoyer and the enjoyed of mundane rasa
are jévas, the entire business is unethical and exploitive, contradicting the
nature of tattva, truth. In reality, one jéva is not the lord and enjoyer of
another jéva, but all jévas, according to their eternal dharma are rather the
bhogya, enjoyed, and Kåñëa is the sole bhoktä, Enjoyer. If the jéva accepts a
role antagonistic to his eternal dharma, his attitude is reprehensible.
Certainly, there are many similarities between the original spiritual object and
its material reflection; therefore, parallels between mundane man-woman
relationships and Kåñëa’s transcendental pastimes with the gopés are inevitable.
However, the former relationships are vile, and the latter are sublime. 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, thank you very much. Your wonderful analysis has strengthened
my faith in this self-evident truth, dissolving the clouds of doubt. I have now
gained a firm understanding of the subject of mädhurya-rasa of the spiritual
world. 

“How extraordinary is this mädhurya-rasa! To express the name is nectarean, how
saturated with extreme ecstasy and transcendental energy! After hearing about
mädhurya-rasa, I am amazed that there are still those who are truly unfortunate
by seeking bliss in çänta-rasa. I am keen on hearing the finer and more profound
details of mädhurya-rasa, kindly explain them to me.”

Gosvämé, “In mädhurya-rasa, Çré Kåñëa is the viñaya, object, His beloved gopés
are the äçraya, shelter, and together they become the älambana, foundation, of
this rasa.”

Vijaya, “Would you kindly explain the qualities of Çré Kåñëa as the viñaya in
mädhurya-rasa?”

Gosvämé, “Ah, my son! What a beautiful question! Çré Kåñëa is that magnanimous
puruña embellished with all good qualities. He possesses the striking hue of a
fresh monsoon-laden cloud. He is lovely, charming, endowed with all-auspicious
symptoms, strong, ever-youthful, expert, intelligent, of sweet speech, and a
genius. He is also very peaceful and patient, witty, astute, self-satisfied,
grateful, and generous. He is captivated by the love of His devotees. He is
grave, the most accomplished in everything, and illustrious. The enchanter of
the gopés, He is always original and unique, a performer of extraordinary deeds.
His exquisite beauty is unmatched. He is the apple of everyone’s eye and the
most expert flute player. The brilliance of His lotus feet outdoes the pride of
Kandarpa, Cupid, and His benign sidelong glances enrapture the heart of
everyone. He is the transcendental ocean of sublime pastimes, which inundates
the hearts of young maidens with unlimited good fortune.”

Vijaya, “Kåñëa, the repository of all transcendental, divine qualities and
splendour, is the sole näyaka, Hero, of this mysterious mädhurya-rasa. I have
understood this fact. Previously, even after studying many devotional texts, I
gave primacy to logic, without question. In this mood, though I thought deeply
about Kåñëa’s personality, I could not develop unflinching faith in Him.
However, my heart has now been impregnated with just a touch of ruci for bhakti,
very much by your mercy! Now my heart is effervescent with bhäva, and I am
constantly experiencing the presence of Kåñëa. Now even if I wanted to leave
Kåñëa, He would not forsake my heart. How munificent is He! Now I can truly
realize the importance of these wonderful words composed by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé
in the Southern Division, Fifth Wave, Verses 78-79, of the
Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu:

sarva thaiva durüho ‘yam abhaktair-bhagavad-rasaù
tat pädämbuja-sarvasvair bhaktair evänurasyate
vyatétya bhävanä-vartma yaç camatkära-bhära-bhuù
hådi sattvojjvale bäòhaà svadate sa raso mataù

“‘Those who are convinced that the lotus feet of Çré Kåñëa are the summon bonum
of life are the purest of devotees, and they alone are capable of relishing
bhakti-rasa. Those whose hearts are bereft of bhakti and rampant with mundane
emotion are generally contaminated by impure habits and are fond of logic and
argumentation. They can never perceive this transcendental rasa. The person who
has transcended the noumenal plane and whose consciousness and heart have been
enlightened by the brilliance of pure goodness that ushers the dawn of
magnificent transcendental bhäva is alone able to experience rasa.”

“True rasa is not available upon the material plane; it is of the spiritual
world. As the jéva is cit-kaëa, a spark of spiritual energy, rasa manifests
within his consciousness. Rasa appears only in deep bhakti-samädhi, devotional
meditation. Those who have received the grace of Çré Gurudeva and have realized
the distinction between çuddha-sattva, pure goodness, and miçra-sattva, mixed
goodness, are free from all doubts.”

Gosvämé, “Very good, Vijaya! Your understanding is correct. Let me see if you
know the relationship between çuddha-sattva and miçra-sattva. The answer to this
question will dissipate many of your own doubts, opening the doors of your
perception to a new truth.”

Vijaya offered prostrated obeisances to his spiritual master and began to speak
with heartfelt humility, “Gurudeva, I will try my best to answer your question.
Kindly correct me if I make any mistakes.

“Life, being, presupposes sattä, existence. When existence, form, ability and
activity are present in an entity, that entity is designated as sattva. That
state of existence—that is eternal, endless, ever-fresh, perennial, unaffected
by time, either past or future, and is infused with extraordinary wonder—is
called çuddha-sattva. Anything begotten by the çuddha-cit-çakti, pure spiritual
energy, is çuddha-sattva. 

“The mäyä-çakti that is the shadow representative of the cit-çakti is controlled
by the time factor, which manifests the concepts of past, present, and future.
All the activities of the mäyä-sakti take place within the domain of the time
factor; they are created—having a beginning—and are thus stamped with mäyä’s
creative quality of raja, passion. Those same activities are also marked for
destruction; hence, they are also stamped with Mäyä’s destructive quality of
tama, ignorance. Entities endowed with such qualities of existence are called
miçra-sattva. 

“In contrast, the çuddha-jéva is çuddha-sattva. His form, qualities and actions
are by nature in pure goodness. However, when the çuddha-jéva is imprisoned by
mäyä, his pure energy is contaminated by mäyä’s illusory potencies in the form
of the material modes of raja and tama. Thus, the materially conditioned jéva is
said to be in the status of miçra-sattva.” 

Gosvämé, “Your explanations are very subtle indeed. Now tell me, how is the
heart of the jéva enlightened by çuddha-sattva?”

Vijaya, “As long as the jéva is captivated by this material world, the
brilliance of his çuddha-sattva nature is curbed by the residual opacity of
mundane conditioning. Yet, the jéva may realize his svarüpa in proportion to the
arising of his brilliant çuddha-sattva nature. However, the uncovering of his
çuddha-sattva nature cannot be achieved through the pursuit of either karma or
jïäna. Can dirt be cleansed by another form of dirt? Mundane karma is by its
very nature contaminated, how can it remove material impurities? Moreover, jïäna
is like fire, for if it is applied to a contaminated object, it not only burns
the impurity but also the object itself, attempting to nullify the object’s
fundamental existence. Therefore, how can jïäna provide the joy that comes from
being purified?

“By the mercy of guru, Kåñëa, and the Vaiñëavas, the jéva can obtain bhakti,
which alone can invoke the çuddha-sattva lying dormant within his heart. When
çuddha-sattva is awakened, it will illuminate the heart with pure transcendental
light.”

Gosvämé, “My son! Truly, it is a pleasure to instruct a fit candidate like you.
Do you have any further questions?”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, earlier you described the four types of näyaka: dhérodätta,
dhéra-lalita, dhéra-çänta, and dhéroddhata. Which of these is Kåñëa?”

Gosvämé, “Kåñëa can play all these roles. Whatever slightly contrary and
distinctive bhävas that may exist between each of these different näyakas are
all perfectly harmonized within Kåñëa, because He is the embodiment of all rasa
and endowed with acintya-çakti. These apparent disparities are present by His
own arrangement. Besides these four unique personality traits, Kåñëa is
embellished by another mysterious feature that is known only to extraordinary,
rare personalities.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, you have showered your mercy without any reservation so
kindly let it flow further, even referring to this topic.”

As Vijaya-kumära spoke, he was overwhelmed with intense emotions. He fell down
at Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé’s feet, bathing them in his tears. Deeply moved,
Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé bent down and embraced him, and their tears mingled.

Çréla Gosvämé then sat back silently, his voice was choked-up, and he was unable
to speak. Finally, in a faltering voice, he said, “In mädhurya-rasa, Kåñëa
assumes two distinct roles as näyaka: pati, husband; and upapati, paramour.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, Kåñëa is our eternal pati, so why is He called an upapati?”

Gosvämé, “This very confidential knowledge is shrouded in profound mystery.
Transcendental affairs are like rare sparkling gems of magnificent mystery, and
the crest jewel Kaustubha-maëi amongst them, shining with an intense aura, is
parakéya-bhäva, the paramour mood of mädhurya-rasa.”

Vijaya, “In mädhurya-rasa the pure devotees serve and love Kåñëa as their pati.
What is the purport of worshiping Him as one’s upapati?”

Gosvämé, “When the para-tattva, Supreme Absolute Truth, is asserted as
exclusively impersonal, rasa necessarily has to be excluded from His nature
along with His personality. Vedic truths, such as the statement in the Chändogya
Upaniñad, 8.13.1: …rasa vai saù… ‘That Supreme Absolute Truth is the
personification of all rasa,’ become meaningless and denied. The impersonal
aspect of the Supreme is insipid, lacking in lustre and spiritual bliss.
However, as Kåñëa’s personal feature unfolds before His devotee, rasa is
increasingly manifest, because rasa is the principal aspect the para-tattva.
Higher than the impersonal aspect of the para-tattva is the personal aspect of
the Supreme Absolute Being. Initially, this personal aspect appears in the role
of Éçvara, the Supreme Controller, that is the object of çänta-rasa. Still above
this feature of the Supreme Controller is His personality as Prabhu, Lord and
Master, that is the object of däsya-rasa. Thus, rasa expands gradually from
däsya, to sakhya, to vätsalya, and from there to mädhurya. And within
mädhurya-rasa, the parakéya-bhäva, paramour mood, is superior to the
svakéya-bhäva, married mood. 

“There are two other aspects of Kåñëa as puruña: ätmärämatä, completeness and
self-satisfaction, and parärämatä, enjoyer of those separated expansions and
energies emanating from Himself. In the ätmärämatä aspect, the enjoyment of rasa
is solely reposed within Kåñëa and takes no assistance from any other entity,
and thus Kåñëa has the quality of being eternally self-satisfied. In the
parärämatä aspect, Kåñëa exhibits the nature of enjoying rasa by the charming
assistance of other entities. Just as Kåñëa’s ätmärämatä aspect is eternal, so
also is His parärämatä, aspect. The harmonious existence of these two opposing
elements—inner self-satisfaction and assisted enjoyment—in the personality of
the Supreme Puruña is His sole prerogative and natural for Him.

“In His pastimes, Kåñëa manifests His ätmärämatä nature in one sphere of
activity, while in another sphere He displays His parärämatä nature. The highest
mood of the parärämatä nature is displayed in His pastimes of parakéya-bhäva.
Parakéya-rasa is the wondrous magnificent nectar produced when the näyaka, Hero,
and näyikä, Heroine, are brought together by räga, spontaneous love, even though
their mutual relationship is para-bhäva, the acceptance of one who belongs to
another.

“Rasa springs forth beginning from the ätmärämatä feature, expanding upwards to
the highest status in parakéya-mädhurya-rasa. Thus, the ätmärämatä nature is at
the bottom of the rasa barometer. When rasa slides down to the bottom, it begins
to dry out; and when rasa moves upward in the direction of
parakéya-mädhurya-rasa, it gushes with exuberance. When Kåñëa is the
transcendental näyaka, how may parakéya relationships be considered vile?

“However, when the mortal conditioned jéva tries to play the role of näyaka, the
question arises whether his activities are moral or immoral. In this case,
within the material world, the parakéya-bhäva is condemnable. The sages have
therefore decided that a relationship between the mundane paramour and his
unchaste lady-love is certainly illicit and despicable. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé
writes that the upapati concept in alaìkära-çästra has been severely castigated,
but this only applies to the mundane näyaka. The finger of accusation should
never point at Kåñëa, because He is the repository of all transcendental rasa
and is the Supreme Personality of Godhead above reproach.”

Vijaya, “Kindly explain the distinctive role of a pati.”

Gosvämé, “A man who accepts a maiden’s hand in marriage is her pati.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly explain the distinctive roles of an upapati, male paramour, and
a parakéya, female paramour.”

Gosvämé, “Any man who because of intense love for a married or betrothed lady
trespasses all religious principles to win her love is an upapati. A married
woman who by disregarding the nuptial vows ignores the religious edicts of
heaven and earth and surrenders to a man who is not her husband is called a
parakéya. Parakéya women are of two categories: kanyä, unmarried; and paroòhä,
married.”

Vijaya, “What are the characteristics of the svakéya ladies?”

Gosvämé, “Svakéya women are married according to religious laws, are obedient to
their husbands, and are fully dedicated to the religious institution of
marriage.” 

Vijaya, “Who are Kåñëa’s svakéya consorts and who are His parakéya consorts?”

Gosvämé, “His consorts in Dvärakä, all of whom are married to Him, are svakéya,
and His consorts in Vraja are mostly pärakiya.” 

Vijaya, “What are the nuances and placements of these two categories of Kåñëa’s
consorts in His apräkåta-lélä, eternal unmanifest pastimes?”

Gosvämé, “This is an extremely esoteric subject. You already know that Kåñëa’s
vibhüti, divine opulence, is divided into four parts. Three parts are displayed
in the spiritual world and the remaining one part in the material world. This
single part, the domain of the mäyä-çakti, manifests the entire material cosmos,
consisting of the fourteen planetary systems. Between the material world, on one
side, and the spiritual world, on the other, a mass of water churns known as the
Virajä River. The cit-jagat, spiritual world, is surrounded on all sides by the
brilliant peripheral zone known as Brahma-dhäma, beyond which, in the paravyoma,
spiritual sky, the spiritual planets of Vaikuëöha are situated. Vaikuëöha is
dominated by aiçvarya; in Vaikuëöha Çré Näräyaëa reigns and is reverentially
worshiped as the Supreme Lord of Lords, embellished with divine attributes and
served by countless servants. 

“In Vaikuëöha Çré Näräyaëa exhibits svakéya-rasa; Çré devé, Bhü devé, Nélä devé
are His çaktis and wives who serve Him as their husband in svakéya-rasa. Above
Vaikuëöha lies Goloka; in Goloka, the gopés of Vraja serve their beloved Kåñëa
in their specific rasa.”

Vijaya, “If Goloka is said to be Kåñëa’s most elevated place of residence, why
is Vraja described as such a glorious and splendid place?”

Gosvämé, “Places such as Vraja, Gokula, and Våndävana are within the precincts
of Çré Mathurä-maëòala. Nonetheless, Mathurä-maëòala and Goloka are on the same
spiritual level. When the dhäma principle is manifest as the highest abode in
the spiritual sky, it is called Goloka, and when it is manifest on the material
plane, it is known as Çré Mathurä-maëòala. Both are equally illustrious and
transcendental.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, it is difficult for me to understand how this can be
possible.” 

Gosvämé, “Kåñëa’s acintya-çakti makes it possible. The mysterious workings of
His acintya-çakti are beyond the realm of logic, intellect, and the noumenal.
The eternal abode known as Goloka-dhäma manifests within the material world as
the stage for the Supreme Lord’s prakaöa-lélä, materially manifest pastimes, and
is called Çré Mathurä-dhäma. And in His aprakaöa-lélä, transcendentally
unmanifest pastimes, the same eternal abode is known as Goloka-dhäma. 

“Kåñëa’s transcendental pastimes are eternal. The devotee who is qualified to
perceive the state of viçuddha-sattva can see Goloka. In fact, even while
residing at Gokula within the material world, qualified devotees have the vision
of Goloka within Gokula. However, those jévas whose consciousness has been
corrupted by the mundane nature cannot perceive Goloka at all. Although Gokula
is non-different from Goloka, mundane persons see Gokula as an ordinary place
belonging to this material world.” 

Vijaya, “What is the eligibility to see Goloka?”

Gosvämé, “Çréla Sukadeva Gosvämé states in the Çrémad Bhägavatam, 10.28.14-15: 

iti saïcintya bhagavän
mahä-käruëiko hariù
darçayäm äsa lokaà svaà
gopänäà tamasaù param

“‘Thus, deeply considering the situation, the all-merciful Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Çré Hari, revealed to the cowherd men His abode, which is beyond the
material.’

atyaà jïänam anantaà yad
brahma-jyotiù sanätanam
yad dhi paçyanti munayo
guëäpäye samähitäù

“‘Çré Kåñëa revealed the indestructible spiritual effulgence, which is
unlimited, conscious and eternal. Sages see that spiritual existence in trance,
when their consciousness is free of the modes of material nature.’ 

“My son, without Kåñëa’s mercy Goloka cannot be perceived. Kåñëa has shown the
beauty and opulence of Goloka to the residents of Vraja by His causeless mercy.
Goloka is situated outside the jurisdiction of the mundane nature, and the
varieties of existence displayed there are eternal realities, ever existent, and
a transcendental wonder. The brahma-jyotir is eternally manifest there as
Kåñëa’s physical aura. Devotees who are cleansed of material aberrations can
perceive this magnificent vision.”

Vijaya, “Are all the liberated jévas able to perceive Goloka?”

Gosvämé, “Among many millions of liberated souls, one rare soul is found who is
a devotee of the Supreme Lord. Those who attain mukti through añöäìga-yoga and
brahma-jïäna enter Brahma-dhäma in the state of ätmävismåti, forgetfulness of
one’s individual spiritual self. Devotees who are attached to the Lord’s
aiçvarya and worship Him in awe and reverence also cannot see Goloka. They serve
Çré Näräyaëa in Vaikuëöha with pomp and grandeur. Amongst the pure devotees
engaged in serving Kåñëa in the mood of vraja-rasa, only those whose material
bondage by Kåñëa’s mercy is completely eradicated are able to see Goloka.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, if only such rare elevated and liberated devotees can see
Goloka, why do the scriptures like Brahma-saàhitä, Hari-vaàça, Padma-puräëa,
etc., carry descriptions of Goloka? If Kåñëa’s mercy descends upon only those
engaged in vraja-bhajana, why were such narrations about Goloka necessary?” 

Gosvämé, “Those rare souls absorbed in relishing vraja-rasa who are lifted out
of the material world by Kåñëa and placed in Goloka can see the entire Goloka.
Some çuddha-bhaktas in vraja-bhäva can see certain parts of Goloka. Of the two
types of pure devotees—siddha and sädhaka—the sädhakas have not yet gained the
eligibility to see Goloka. 

“Siddha-bhaktas are of two varieties: vastu-siddha; perfect in the realization
of the ultimate objective, Kåñëa; and svarüpa-siddha, those who have achieved
the perfection of being reinstated in their spiritual identity.

“The vastu-siddha devotees are the glorious and fortunate ones who have been
installed directly in the spiritual abode of Goloka by Çré Kåñëa’s mercy. The
svarüpa-siddha devotees are able to perceive Goloka directly, but have not yet
received Kåñëa’s mercy to the extent of being lifted out of the material nature
and becoming installed in Goloka. However, Kåñëa’s mercy is gradually opening-up
and enhancing their spiritual and devotional visions, hence they are eligible
for a wide range of spiritual perfections. Differently graded svarüpa-siddha
devotees have their spiritual eyes opened to varying degrees, and their vision
of Goloka is proportionate to the amount of Kåñëa’s mercy they have received.

“As long as bhakti is on the platform of sädhana-bhakti, everything the sädhana
devotee sees in Goloka is slightly tinged with mundane understanding. After
being promoted to the stage of bhävä-bhakti, the devotee is blessed with direct
glimpses of Goloka. On the level of prema-bhakti, the devotee sees Goloka to a
much greater extent.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, in what aspects are there differences between Goloka and
Vraja-gokula?”

Gosvämé, “Whatever you see in Vraja is there also in Goloka. The differences of
perception arise solely because of the varying consciousness of the different
viewers, which is graded according to their levels of çraddhä and bhakti. In
reality, there is no distinction between Goloka and Vraja Våndävana; it is
merely the perception of the viewer that creates differences. Persons steeped in
tama-guëa see everything in Vraja as material objects; whereas, persons
conducted primarily by raja-guëa see with a slightly more elevated and
auspicious material consciousness. Finally, persons advancing in sattva-guëa can
increasingly view in çuddha-sattva. Thus, everyone views the dhäma according to
their own level of eligibility, and consequently what they see is different.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, the subject is getting clearer and clearer in my
understanding, but kindly give examples to properly clarify this point. I am
aware that material examples cannot fully explain spiritual concepts, but even
if they convey just a limited idea or a single similar aspect, then the whole
spiritual concept becomes easier to comprehend.” 

Gosvämé, “This is indeed a complex problem, for it is prohibited to reveal one’s
own realizations of these esoteric truths. Whatever realizations and perceptions
one gathers by Kåñëa’s mercy must be kept a guarded secret. However, I will
disclose to you whatever the previous spiritual preceptors have acquiesced to
reveal. And whatever remains to be known by you, by Kåñëa’s mercy, you will soon
perceive.

“In Goloka, all perception is based upon pure spiritual consciousness, thus
mundane perception is absolutely absent. For nourishing rasa, Kåñëa’s cit-sakti
conjures up a wide range of bhäva. One of the elements created by bhäva is known
as abhimäna, spiritual self-conception out of transcendental love. 

“Kåñëa in Goloka is unborn and without a source, yet to embellish the lélä
eternal associates such as Nanda Maharaja and Yaçodä devé have personified the
vätsalya-rasa through their abhimäna of fatherhood and motherhood, respectively.


“Similarly, in mädhurya or çåìgära-rasa, the dichotomy of vipralambha-bhäva and
sambhoga-bhäva are present as manifestations of abhimäna. Actually, in
parakéya-bhäva, the parakéya-abhimäna, self-conception as a female paramour, and
the upapati-abhimäna, self-conception as a male paramour, are eternally in full
play to embellish the lélä although simultaneously the underlying relationship
is of çuddha-svakéya, pure conjugal union.

“In Vraja-gokula, however, these same abhimänas become apparently manifest in a
gross and mundane outward form because of the mundane notions of the viewers.
For example, in Vraja Mother Yaçodä actually gives birth to a child in her
maternity room. The nitya-siddha gopés are married in ceremonies to gopas such
as Abhimanyu and Govardhana-gopa, and on this very real basis have
parakéya-abhimäna. Thus, the various abhimänas of Goloka are present in
Vraja-gokula in a very tangible form. In truth, all this is orchestrated by
Kåñëa’s yoga-mäyä-çakti and has extremely subtle links with the original
primeval truth. Not the least part of these léläs is false, and all aspects are
a facsimile of Goloka. Differences in perception occur on account of the various
degrees of obstructing mundane consciousness in the viewers.” 

Vijaya, “Must we first purify the quality of our bhajana in
añöa-käléya-lélä-smaraëa, meditation upon the eternal pastimes of Goloka by the
eight daily time-divisions, and then try to grasp these topics of Vraja?” 

Gosvämé, “No, that is incorrect. Meditation upon the añöa-käléya-lélä of Goloka
must be conducted on the basis of one’s own realization of vraja-lélä. Then on
the strength of one’s individual bhajana, one attracts the Lord’s grace and
accordingly the léläs will be spontaneously manifest before one. It is not
necessary that one tries to improve one’s bhäva and perception of the pastimes
solely by one’s own endeavours.”

Vijaya, “One of the axioms of rhetoric states:

 yadåçé bhävanä yasya siddhir bhavati tädåçé

“‘A person attains the grades of perfection proportionate to his intellect.’

“According to this logic, whatever quality of meditation was present during the
years of sädhana will beget the equivalent degree of perfection. Therefore, may
I assume that after all it is imperative that one refines his meditation upon
Goloka?”

Gosvämé, “Very true. Whatever is present in vraja-lélä is rooted in the Supreme
Absolute Truth; nothing in vraja-lélä is contrary to the transcendental reality.
Any contradiction would indicate imperfection. When sädhana is purified and
mature, it is transformed into siddhi. And as sädhana is progressively refined,
the incipient perceptions of siddhi become sharper. Give full attention to your
sädhana so that it is executed properly; however, do not try to purify your
bhäva and perception of lélä by your own capacity. In due time, Kåñëa, who is
the fountainhead of the acintya-çakti, will do that for you. On your own, such
attempts will be adulterated by the attitude of empirical, non-devotional jïäna,
but when Kåñëa showers His grace all anomalies will be removed effortlessly.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I feel so blessed today. May I ask another question? Are the
consorts of Dvärakä also allowed shelter in Goloka?”

Gosvämé, “In the spiritual sky, Vaikuëöha offers endless bliss; Vaikuëöha is the
highest attainment. Dvärakä and countless other realms are present there. The
queens of Dvärakä reside and serve Kåñëa in their individual palaces. No one
else is allowed to enter Goloka in mädhurya-rasa besides the vraja-ramaëés,
damsels of Våndävana. The entire spectrum of transcendental léläs enacted in
Vraja is present in Goloka. However, it is mentioned in the Gopäla-täpané
Upaniñad that Queen Rukmiëé enjoys svakéya-lélä with Kåñëa in Mathurä within the
precincts of Goloka.” 

Vijaya, “The range of parakéya-rasa pastimes visible in Vraja—is it present in
Goloka in the same sequence?”

Gosvämé, “Yes, the pastimes are present in Goloka in the same sequence, except
those portions that are enacted in conjunction with the mäyä-çakti. Although
these portions are missing, each of them has a pure transcendental source. I do
not wish to delve deeper into this topic, you will learn about it through your
mature bhajana.”

Vijaya, “This entire material manifestation disappears at the time of
mahä-pralaya, total annihilation, so how is the sämprata-bhäva, timelessness, of
vraja-lélä eternal?”

Gosvämé, “Vraja-lélä is eternal in two ways. First, the prakaöa-lélä, manifest
pastimes, are sämprata-pratéti, constantly present for perception, since they
are in a cyclic continuum of manifestation progressing throughout the different
material universes. Thus, the different prakaöa-léläs are continually and
simultaneously manifesting within the material creation. The sun is always
rising relative to one area of this particular planet, in the same way, a
particular prakaöa-lélä is always manifesting in one of the material universes.
And as it becomes unmanifest in that particular universe, it becomes manifest in
the next universe. In this way, the prakaöa-lélä are eternal. Secondly, in the
aprakaöa, unmanifest, state, all pastimes are manifest in the nitya-vartamäna,
transcendental eternal present.”

Vijaya, “If the prakaöa-lélä is manifest in every universe, is there a
Vraja-dhäma in each universe?”

Gosvämé, “Yes, that is true. Goloka is a manifest entity, present in every
brahmäëòa as the lélä-dhäma, transcendental site of divine pastimes. Goloka is
also manifest in the hearts of the çuddha-bhaktas.”

Vijaya, “Why does the Çré Mathurä-maëòala area remain manifest in those
universes where the léläs are presently unmanifest?”

Gosvämé, “In Mathurä-maëòala, the aprakaöa-lélä is eternally present. The dhäma,
however, remains manifest in order to exhibit mercy to the pure devotee
residents.”

The discussion concluded at this point, and Vijaya-kumära returned home
engrossed in thoughts of sevä in the añöa-käléya-lélä.

Thus ends the thirty-first chapter of the Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Mädhurya-rasa,
The Supremely Sweet Conjugal Mellow, Part One

JDH 32: Mädhurya-rasa, Part Two

Chapter Thirty-two
Mädhurya-rasa, Part Two

Vrajanätha after concluding his bhajana put his japa beads aside and retired for
the night. Vijaya-kumära had also lain himself upon his bed after finishing his
evening prasädam, but he found sleep elusive. He had always been under the
impression that Goloka was a separate place from Gokula, but today he had heard
that Goloka and Gokula were non-different—therefore parakéya-rasa was also
rooted in Goloka. However, one thought kept turning in his mind, “How does Kåñëa
accept the role of an upapati, a paramour? Kåñëa is the Supreme Truth, and
Çaktimän Kåñëa and His çakti are non-different. Even if çakti were to be
separated from çaktimän, how could çakti be considered married to another gopa
and Kåñëa the upapati?”

Initially he thought, “I shall ask Çréla Gurudeva about this conundrum
tomorrow,” but then reflected, “Perhaps returning to this topic would be
inappropriate; yet, this irksome perplexity is better dispelled.” Eventually
Vijaya’s ponderings were assuaged by the gentle caress of sleep, but all at
once, he found himself before his Gurudeva in a vivid dream submitting the very
mystery that had so insistently beset his mind.

Vijaya heard the reply of his guru distinctly, “Dear son! Kåñëa is fully
independent in all His activities; His desires are unimpeded and absolute. His
eternal desire is that His mädhurya should be fully revealed and predominate
over His aiçvarya. Accordingly, He has given a separate identity to His divine
parä-çakti, who subsequently manifests countless millions of stunningly
beautiful gopés to serve Him eternally with tender loving care. However, Kåñëa
is not fully satisfied by service influenced by perception of His aiçvarya. So
by exhibiting a fabulous aspect of His yoga-mäyä-çakti He arranges for all the
gopés to adopt the abhimäna of being the wives of gopas in the idyllic village
of Vraja-våndävana. As a result, the gopés live in their individual households,
identifying with their status as the married women of Vraja. In concert with
this abhimäna, Kåñëa joyfully assumes relationship with the gopés in the role of
upapati. 

“Out of lobha for relishing parakéya-rasa, Kåñëa is allured into transgressing
His inner ätmäräma-dharma of being infinitely self-satisfied. He engages in
gorgeous pastimes such as the räsa-lélä with His beloved gopé sweethearts who
aptly consider themselves married to other gopas. His vaàçé becomes His
priya-sakhé to initiate these intimate pastimes of bliss. To facilitate Kåñëa’s
perfect enjoyment of parakéya-rasa, parakéya-bhäva is eternally displayed in
Goloka, wherein innumerable sylvan bowers, such as Keli-våndävana, remain
eternally in pastoral splendour as sites for His amorous play. The site of the
räsa-lélä, the Yamunä River, Giri-Govardhana, and all the places of Kåñëa’s
Vraja-gokula pastimes are completely available in Goloka. In this way,
parakéya-bhäva and svakéya-bhäva are present in Goloka as elements to churn
delightful rasa from the ocean of Kåñëa’s most intimate pastimes. Actually,
çuddha-svakéya-bhäva, the purest form of the conjugal mood, reigns resplendently
in Vaikuëöha. Parakéya-rasa is unique to Vraja Våndävana, and though viewed as
illicit from the mundane platform, in essence it is non-different from
svakéya-rasa, because the young gopés are the eternal çakti of Kåñëa.
Ultimately, the vraja-gopés must be regarded as Kåñëa’s eternal conjugal
consorts, immersed in the moods of svakéyatva, conjugal faithfulness, and
dämpatya, conjugal love, towards Him beginninglessly.

“Parakéya-bhäva is sustained in Goloka by abhimäna, spiritual conception. In
Vraja-Gokula, Abhimanyu and the other gopas are avatäras of their respective
abhimäna in Goloka. In Vraja-Gokula these gopas take birth and become the
husbands of the gopés in order to foster the pastimes of Kåñëa, making Kåñëa the
upapati and essential näyaka of vraja-lélä. Similarly, far beyond the reach of
the external material nature, in the transcendental abode of Goloka, all the
varieties of abhimäna fully nurture rasa. In Gokula, manifest within this
material universe, the abhimänas of Goloka demonstrate their individual
existence when Yogamäyä arranges for them to take birth. For the gopés, this
creates the experience of being married; however, in their eternal love for
Kåñëa, the vraja-gopés transgress the strictures of marriage, and thus
parakéya-rasa is fully nurtured in Gokula. This is all the play of Yogamäyä.”

The doubts of Vijaya-kumära dissipated as the dream faded away. His
understanding that the transcendental abode of Goloka in the spiritual sky
manifests as Gokula in the material world, became a firm conviction. The
ecstatic revelation of his tädätmya-svarüpa, own individual spiritual identity,
in vraja-rasa began to gather momentum within his heart, and so his meditations
upon the eternal añöa-käléya-lélä of Vraja now turned deep and resolute. Early
next morning he awoke feeling overwhelmed with the mercy that his guru had
showered upon him. He considered, “Gurudeva has given unlimited mercy. Now I
should hear directly from him about the different elements of rasa, and so
attain niñöhä, steadiness, in bhajana.”

Completing his noon prasädam, Vijaya-kumära arrived at the äçrama of his guru,
falling at his feet in tears of ecstasy. Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé slowly lifted
him up and sat him down with loving care. 

Çréla Gosvämé said, “Son, I see that Kåñëa has blessed you—I feel blessed just
by seeing you.” As he spoke, Çréla Gosvämé entered the throes of divine rapture,
he embraced Vijaya and began to recite a song from Prema-Vivarta: 

prasanna haiyä kåñëa yäre kåpa kare
sei jana dhanya ei saàsära bhitare

“‘When Kåñëa is pleased with someone and showers His mercy divine, then blessed
is that soul, light of the earth.’

golokera parama-bhäva tära citte sphüre
gokule goloka päya mäyä paòe düre

“‘The most sublime bhäva of Goloka stirs in the depths of his heart, Goloka
manifests in Gokula, and mäyä recedes into some long forgotten past.’”

After he had sung for a long time, Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé’s ecstasy gradually
subsided and he became aware of his external surrounding. Vijaya-kumära first
offered repeated obeisances to his guru and then began to speak.

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I have no comprehension of kåñëa-kåpä, the mercy of Kåñëa;
yet, I am firmly convinced that your mercy is the cause of all my spiritual
progress. I have stopped trying to force myself to perceive Goloka, being now
very satisfied to realize Vraja-Gokula. Now I wish to understand properly the
varieties of vraja-rasa. Kindly explain if the unmarried gopés of Gokula, who
maintained the mood that Kåñëa would be their husband, may be called svakéya or
not?” 

Gosvämé, “Yes, since they maintain the firm conviction that Kåñëa will be their
husband, these unmarried gopés attain at that particular time svakéya-bhäva.
Intrinsically, however, the gokula-gopés are connected to Kåñëa in
parakéya-bhäva. In this particular case, although these unmarried gopés are not
ultimately of svakéya nature their svakéya-bhäva is perfectly integrated into
the Gokula pastimes, because their desired marriage to Kåñëa is eventually
fulfilled in secret by gandharva-viväha-réti, the Gandharva rite of marriage by
the mutual exchange of garlands.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I have numerous queries, and I wish to understand your
answers in the light of the philosophy delineated in the Ujjvala-nélamaëi.
First, I would like to get a clear conception of näyaka. The text of
Ujjvala-nélamaëi says that there are four types of näyaka: anuküla, favourable;
dakñiëa, guileless; çaöha, duplicitous; and dhåñöa, audacious. Kindly explain
the anuküla-näyaka.” 

Gosvämé, “The näyaka who is faithfully in love with just one consort without
aspiring for further romantic liaisons is called anuküla, the favourable näyaka.
Çré Räma epitomizes this mood towards Sétä devé, and Çré Kåñëa does so towards
Çrématé Rädhä.” 

Vijaya, “Earlier, you spoke of four kinds of näyaka—dhérodätta, dhéra-lalita,
dhéra-çänta, and dhéroddhata—what is the relationship between these four types
of näyaka and the second set of four näyakas we have just mentioned? What, for
example, are the characteristics of the dhérodätta-anuküla-näyaka?” 

Gosvämé, “A dhérodätta-anuküla-näyaka is grave, humble, forgiving,
compassionate, fixed in his resolve, not boastful of himself, modest, and is
very noble and generous. However, he is also quick to forsake all these
qualities and run secretly to meet His näyikä, sweetheart heroine.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly describe the dhéra-lalita-anuküla-näyaka.”

Gosvämé, “The qualities of the dhéra-lalita-anuküla-näyaka are brilliant wit,
ever-youthful, a relisher of rasa, self-confident, and without anxiety. When
these attributes are features of his character, combined with the constant
enjoyment of pleasure, he is called a dhéra-lalita-anuküla-näyaka.”

Vijaya, “What is the nature of the dhéra-çänta-anuküla-näyaka?”

Gosvämé, “His nature is peaceful, tolerant, considerate, and he is guided by his
conscience.”

Vijaya, “And the dhéroddhata-anuküla-näyaka?”

Gosvämé, “When the personality of the dhéroddhata-näyaka—which is marked by
envy, pride, deceptiveness, anger, and self-praise—becomes favourable, he is
known as the dhéroddhata-anuküla-näyaka.”

Vijaya, “How may a näyaka become dakñiëa?”

Gosvämé, “The word dakñiëa means honest and guileless. A dakñiëä-näyaka does not
lessen his respect, fear and submissive love for his first näyikä, even when he
becomes romantically attached to another näyikä. Therefore, He maintains
relationships of equal depth with many näyikäs simultaneously and is called a
dakñiëa-näyaka.”

Vijaya, “What are the symptoms of the çaöha-näyaka?”

Gosvämé, “The näyaka who is amiable and sweet in the presence of a näyikä but
vituperative and offensive behind her back is called çaöha, two-faced.”

Vijaya, “What are the symptoms of a dhåñöa-näyaka?”

Gosvämé, “A näyaka who carries signs of intimacy with another näyikä upon his
body but boldly and glibly lies in the presence of the näyikä who is presently
with him is a dhåñöa-näyaka, audacious romantic Hero.”

Vijaya, “How many types of näyakas are there altogether?”

Gosvämé, “As far as we are concerned, Kåñëa is the only näyaka. In Dvärakä, He
is pürëa, complete; in Mathurä, He is pürëatara, more complete; and in Vraja, He
is pürëatama, most complete. Since Kåñëa is both pati and upapati in the three
grades of completeness, we reach six varieties of näyakas. Then, we compound the
four kinds of näyakas, such as dhérodätta, etc., with that previous six, making
twenty-four varieties of näyakas. And when this twenty-four is multiplied by the
second set of four näyakas, such as anuküla, dakñiëä, etc., we arrive at
ninety-six types of näyaka.” 

“Now you should consider that there are twenty-four näyakas in svakéya-rasa and
twenty-four in parakéya-rasa. In His vraja-lélä pastimes, Kåñëa’s svakéya-rasa
is in a saìkoca, withdrawn mood; however His parakéya-rasa is eternally
displayed in Vraja by the twenty-four different Vraja näyakas. Different näyaka
types are displayed as required for the great variety of pastimes, even just for
short periods. However, all of them are distinctly recognizable.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I am gradually discerning the unique characteristics of the
different types of näyaka, now I am keen to learn who are the sahäyas,
assistants, of Kåñëa as näyaka.”

Gosvämé, “The näyaka has five categories of sahäya: ceöa, confidential
messenger; viöa, attendant; vidüñaka, humorist; péöha-mardda, highly qualified
friend; and priya-narma-sakhä, confidential friend. The sahäyas are all
proficient in sweet and pleasing conversation; they possess deep anuräga,
commitment, to Kåñëa; they are excellent in judging time and circumstances; they
are expert and versatile; they can charm the gopés to pacify their anger; and
they also offer intimate and confidential advice to the gopés.” 

Vijaya, “What are the characteristics of the ceöa-sahäya?”

Gosvämé, “The ceöa-sahäya are good at spying and gathering information,
accomplishing secret missions, and are fearless, bold, and intelligent. Bhaìgura
and Bhåìgara are the leading ceöa-sahäya of Kåñëa in Gokula.” 

Vijaya, “What are the characteristics of the viöa-sahäya?”

Gosvämé, “The viöa-sahäya are talented in dressing and ornamenting Kåñëa, they
are cunning, skilled in conversation, and know the mystical art of casting
spells and making charms to bring others under control. Kaòära and
Bhäraté-bandha are prominent viöa-sahäya.” 

Vijaya, “What are the characteristics of the vidüñaka-sahäya?”

Gosvämé, “Gormandizing, quarrelling, making humorous bodily caricatures, making
quick witty retorts, and making other people laugh by dressing funnily are the
qualities of Vasanta, Madhu-maìgala, and the other vidüñaka-sahäya of Kåñëa.”

Vijaya, “What are the characteristics of the péöha-mardda-sahäya?”

Gosvämé, “Almost as qualified as the näyaka, Kåñëa Himself, the only
péöha-mardda-sahäya, Çrédämä, is still content to be Kåñëa’s follower and
constant companion.” 

Vijaya, “What are the characteristics of the priya-narma-sakhä-sahäya?”

Gosvämé, “The priya-narma-sakhä-sahäya, amongst whom Subala and Arjuna are
prominent, share extremely confidential secrets and they emulate the bhävas of
the gopés. Therefore, they are the best of Kåñëa’s friends. 

“Amongst these five, the ceöa-sahäya are in däsya-rasa, the péöha-mardda are in
véra-rasa, and the other three sahäya are all in sakhya-rasa. Further, the
ceöa-sahäya are all in the category of Kåñëa’s kiëkara, servants; whereas the
other four sahäya are His sakhäs.”

Vijaya, “Are there no female sahäyä of Kåñëa?” 

Gosvämé, “Yes, there are, and they are known as dütés, messengers.” 

Vijaya, “Are there many kinds of dütés?”

Gosvämé, “There are two varieties of düté: svayaà-düté, messengers of one’s own
self; and äpta-düté, messengers on behalf of oneself. Katäkña, the sidelong
glance, and Vaàçé-dhvani, the flute sound and song, are svayaà-dütés.” 

Vijaya, “Who are the äpta-dütés?”

Gosvämé, “Kåñëa’s äpta-dütés are Vérä, who is a bold, even cheeky and artful
speaker, and Våndä, who is an expert flatterer. The svayaà-düté and äpta-düté
are asädhäraëé, very special, personalities. Besides these special dütés, Kåñëa
has many sädhäraëé-dütés, ordinary female messengers, categorised as liìginé,
daiva-jïä, and çilpa-käriëé. They will be discussed later under the topic of
näyikäs and dütés, when they will be more relevant.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I am steadily comprehending Kåñëa as näyaka, His mood,
characteristics, etc., also that His pastimes as pati and upapati are both
eternal. As pati, He performs His pastimes in Dvärakä, and as upapati, He
performs His pastimes in Vraja. As our beloved Kåñëa is upapati, it is
indispensable to my bhajana to learn something about the vraja-ramaëés, the
gopés of Vraja.”

Gosvämé, “Kåñëa’s consorts in Vraja are all primarily in parakéya-rasa, for
without parakéya, mädhurya-rasa cannot fully blossom to the highest pristine
splendour. The mädhurya-rasa of the queens in Dvärakä is restricted because of
the formal conjugal relationship; whereas, the vraja-ramaëés are embellished
with çuddha-käma for Kåñëa, making their mädhurya-rasa unbridled and fearless,
and this gives the greatest pleasure to Kåñëa.” 

Vijaya, “What is the purport of this philosophy?”

Gosvämé, “Rudra, Lord Çiva, the expert preceptor of çåìgära-rasa, says that
womanly traits such as vämatä, contrariness, and dhurlabhatä, elusiveness, etc.,
create an aura around the beloved, making her appear most difficult to obtain.
These painful difficulties of attaining the treasured maiden are the most
devastating weapons of Kandarpa Kämadeva—the arrows of love. Viñëu-gupta
comments that when the impediments on the path to reach the coveted doe-eyed
beloved are numerous, the heart of the gallant lover naturally becomes more
deeply captivated by her. 

“Kåñëa is ätmäräma yet in the räsa-lélä He expands into as many Kåñëas as there
are gopés and individually dances with each one of them. Every sädhaka must
develop attachment and devotion to the räsa-lélä. One piece of advice could be
given: If the sädhaka desires his highest benefit, then he must enter this
divine räsa-lélä pastime in a mood of devoted service and never even entertain
the thought of acting like Kåñëa. The purport is that one must develop
gopé-bhäva by being humbly subservient to the gopés—this is the only entrance to
these pastimes.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly explain gopé-bhäva.”

Gosvämé, “Kåñëa, son of Nanda Maharaja, is a gopa and His most exquisite
partners in mädhurya-rasa are solely the gopés. The sädhaka who is eligible to
practise mädhurya-çåìgära-rasa must perform kåñëa-bhajana in the same manner as
the gopés. He must assume in his mind that he is a gopé in Vraja, a maidservant
under the guidance of an immensely fortunate vraja-väsiné, female resident of
Vraja. His only business should be to strictly execute her instructions and
lovingly serve Çré Rädhikä and Çré Kåñëa. He must conceive of himself as
paroòhä, a gopé married to a gopa, who always desires Kåñëa’s association. Only
then, he can evoke parakéya-rasa from within his heart. This paroòhä-abhimäna is
the innate dharma of the vraja-gopés. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé writes in verse
nineteen, Çré Ujjvala-nélamaëi, Kåñëa-vallabhä prakaraëa:

mäyä-kalita-tädåk-stré-çélanenänusüyibhiù
na jätu vrajadevénäà patibhiù saha saìgamaù 

“‘The vraja-gopés who maintain the abhimäna of being paroòhä become wives of
gopas after a contrived marriage has been arranged by Yogamäyä. However, they
never consummate their marriages with their individual husbands. When these
gopés are away from their homes on a lover’s rendezvous with Kåñëa, again
Yogamäyä creates their exact replicas to be present in their houses. When the
husband returns and sees his wife in the house, he considers, “My wife is
certainly here at home.” Thus, he can never develop envy towards Kåñëa.’

“There is never an intimate conjugal relationship between the vraja-gopés and
their so-called husbands. In truth, these contrived husbands are the avatäras in
Vraja-Gokula of the paroòha-bhäva of the gopés in Goloka. Their marriages are
also mäyika-pratyaya, illusory notions; hence, there is no question of the
vraja-gopés being the wedded wives of these husbands, or in relationship to
Kåñëa another’s wife. Nevertheless, paroòha-abhimäna is eternally present within
the hearts of the vraja-gopés. Were this paroòha-abhimäna absent, then the
wondrous rasa engendered by the transgression of marriage vows, the impediments
placed before the upapati, and the gopés’ vämatä, contrariness, and dhurlabhatä,
elusiveness, would never be natural and spontaneous. Therefore, to attain the
bhäva of a näyikä in vraja-rasa, that one should cultivate paroòha-abhimäna is
indispensable. Çré Lakñmé Devé in Vaikuëöha is an example of someone who cannot
enter parakéya-rasa since she does not cultivate paroòha-abhimäna.” 

Vijaya, “What is the process of cultivating paroòha-abhimäna?”

Gosvämé, “One must meditate, thinking, ‘I have taken birth in the home of a gopa
in Vraja and when I reached the proper age I was given in marriage to a youthful
gopa.” When such meditation intensifies, then the desire to attain Kåñëa’s
intimate companionship gains momentum. In this way, one assumes the mood of a
gopé yearning for Kåñëa in an unconsummated marriage. This is the cultivation of
gopé-bhäva.”

Vijaya, “How is it possible for a male sädhaka to assume gopé-bhäva?”

Gosvämé, “The jéva thinks of himself or herself as male or female only by the
influence of the mäyä-çakti. In the realm of spiritual nature, except for
Kåñëa’s eternal male associates, the inherent spiritual nature of all jévas is
female. In the transcendental nature, the material features that distinguish the
different sexes of this world do not exist. Any jéva can acquire the right to
become a vraja-väsiné when impelled by his innate svabhäva and the resolute
cultivation of the pertinent abhimäna. Only those who possess such an unwavering
desire for mädhurya-rasa are eligible to become vraja-väsinés. When a person’s
sädhana complements his ruci, he attains perfection accordingly.” 

Vijaya, “How would you describe the glorious position of a paroòha-gopé?”

Gosvämé, “When the paroòha-vraja-gopé intensely desires to enjoy with Kåñëa, her
natural beauty and glorious excellences combine with the unfathomable loveliness
of prema to make her a radiant, enchanting beauty in the eyes of her beloved.
The paroòha-vraja-gopé experiences a greater level of relish in rasa than that
of all the çaktis of Bhagavän, headed by Çré Lakñmé Devé.”

Vijaya, “How many varieties of vraja-sundaré are there?”

Gosvämé, “They are of three kinds: sädhana-parä, gopés by sädhana; devé, gopés
previously devés; and nitya-priyä, eternally dear gopés.” 

Vijaya, “Are there varieties of sädhana-parä gopés?”

Gosvämé, “Yes, the sädhana-para-gopés are of two types: yauthiké, linked in
yüthas, groups; and ayauthiké, not linked in groups.” 

Vijaya, “Who are the yauthiké?”

Gosvämé, “The yauthiké take birth in Vraja in groups having been immersed in the
sädhana of vraja-rasa. The yauthiké are further subdivided as muni-gaëa and
upaniñad-gaëa.”

Vijaya, “Which munis took birth in Vraja?”

Gosvämé, “The munis who were worshiping Gopäla but could not at that time attain
perfection gained great impetus in their sädhana by seeing the beauty of Çré
Rämacandra in Tretä-yuga. After then accomplishing their sädhana in gopé-bhäva,
they were born as gopés in Vraja. This is substantiated in the Padma Puräëa. The
Båhad-vämana Puräëa states that some of these munis attained final spiritual
perfection at the beginning of the räsa-lélä.” 

Vijaya, “How did the Upaniñads attain the status of being born as gopés in
Vraja?”

Gosvämé, “Endowed with very subtle and fine spiritual perceptions, the highly
elevated personifications of the Upaniñads were astounded by the good fortune of
the gopés. By meditating deeply and worshiping the gopés with profound devotion,
they were finally born in Vraja as gopés.” 

Vijaya, “Who are the ayauthiké-sädhana-parä-gopés ?”

Gosvämé, “The ayauthiké are extremely attracted to gopé-bhäva, and eagerly
channel this natural ruci into their sädhana with deep anuräga, attachment. They
are of two types: präcénä, established; and navénä, new. They take birth in
Vraja, either alone, in pairs, or in threes. The präcénä-ayauthiké-gopés have
attained sälokya with the nitya-priyä-gopés a long time ago. The
navénä-ayauthiké-gopés are taking their initial births as gopés in Vraja through
the species of devas, humans, and other suitable beings. Gradually, they are
converted from navénä to präcénä and attain sälokya, as I have described
earlier.”

Vijaya, “I can grasp this description of the sädhana-para-gopés, now kindly
explain who are the devés?”

Gosvämé, “When the aàça, partial expansion, of Kåñëa incarnates in Svarga as a
deva, the nitya-priyä-gopés also appear there in their aàças as devés to please
Kåñëa. Similarly, when Kåñëa appears in Vraja-gokula, in His pürëa-rüpa, full
expansion, then these devés also take birth in Gokula as the young gopés known
as the präëa-sakhés. The präëa-sakhés engage as assistants of the
nitya-priyä-gopés who are the aàçanés, fountainhead sources, from whom these
devés originally emanated as aàças for service to Kåñëa in His forms as
particular devas in Svarga.”

Vijaya, “At what times does Kåñëa accept an aàça expansion in Svarga?”

Gosvämé, “Kåñëa’s sväàça-rüpa, direct partial expansion, is Çré Vämana, the son
of Aditi, and His vibhinnäàças, separated partial expansions, appear as the
devas. Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä were not conceived in a mother’s womb, and
although they are not on the level of the ordinary jévas, who are endowed with
meagre quantities of the first fifty qualities of Kåñëa, still both Çiva and
Brahmä are vibhinnäàças. Since, they possess the fifty qualities to a high
degree, plus, in limited quantity, five additional qualities that are not
normally found in ordinary jévas, they are considered the chief devas. Gaëeça
and Sürya hold similarly high positions in the material cosmos and are worshiped
with respect equal to that given to Çiva and Brahmä, but all the other devas
actually belong to the jéva-tattva category. Thus, all the devas are the
vibhinnäàças of Kåñëa and their devé wives are vibhinnäàça expansions of the
cit-çakti of the Lord. Prior to the appearance of Çré Kåñëa, Brahmä instructs
these devés to take birth in order to please the Lord. They then appear either
in Vraja or in Dvärakä, according to their individual ruci and sädhana. The
devés who take birth as vraja-gopés do so because of their intense innate desire
to attain Kåñëa, and they become the präëa-sakhés, assistants to the
nitya-priyä-gopés who are ultimately their source.”

Vijaya, “The Upaniñads took birth as gopés in Vraja. Did any other presiding
devés of Vedic çästra appear in Vraja?” 

Gosvämé, “The såñöi-khaëòa of the Padma Puräëa states that Veda-mätä Gäyatré
devé, the mother of the Vedas, was born in Vraja as a gopé and attained the
association of Kåñëa, at which point she acquired the form of käma-gäyatré.”

Vijaya, “Yet, is it not true that käma-gäyatré is anädi, beginningless?” 

Gosvämé, “Käma-gäyatré is certainly anädi. However, within the material
universe, there is a time when she first manifested as Veda-mätä Gäyatré devé.
Later in her lélä, inspired by the good fortune of the many Upaniñads, she
performed sädhana on the strength of which she took birth in Vraja along with
Gopäla Upaniñad. As käma-gäyatré she is eternal; simultaneously, she is
eternally existent as Gäyatré devé in a separate but eternal identity.” 

Vijaya, “The personified Upaniñads and other great devotees obtained the rare
birth as gopés in Vraja. Having acquired the gopé-abhimäna, they accepted Kåñëa
as their pati and gopa-näyaka. In fact, Kåñëa became their husband by the mutual
exchange of nuptial vows according to the Gandharva marriage rites. This I have
understood. However, the nitya-priyä-gopés are the consorts of Kåñëa from a time
without beginning, so is their love for Kåñëa as an upapati constructed by the
mäyä-çakti?”

Gosvämé, “Yes, the upapati relationship is conceived by the influence of mäyä,
but not the mundane jaòa-mäyä. Mahä-mäyä of the material world cannot even
slightly touch kåñëa-lélä. Although vraja-lélä is performed within this material
world, vraja-lélä is nevertheless completely transcendental to the illusory
material jaòa-mäyä. Another definition of cit-çakti is Yogamäyä and in
kåñëa-lélä, she creates a very special effect, enveloping the lélä and colouring
the eyes of the mundane observers so that they see the pastimes from a very
external point of view, completely different from their actual transcendental
quality. 

“When the nitya-priyä-gopés descend from Goloka to Vraja, Yogamäyä accompanies
them, bringing with her the paroòha-abhimäna of Goloka. She establishes every
paroòha-abhimäna as an individual personality, for example, Abhimanyu in Vraja.
Then, she arranges marriages of the nitya-priyä-gopés with their own individual
personified abhimäna, thus installing Kåñëa as their upapati. The omniscient
puruña Çré Kåñëa and His omniscient çaktis, totally absorbed in rasa,
voluntarily acquiesce their sublime status and happily accept these pastime
roles arranged by Yogamäyä. This underlines the pre-eminent position of rasa and
the excellence of the icchä-çakti in fulfilling the desires of the supremely
independent Lord.

“Both Vaikuëöha and Dvärakä are deprived of such intensity of rasa, lélä, and so
on. When the präëa-sakhés gain sälokya in Vraja with their mistresses, the
nitya-priyä-gopés, their previous constrained pati-bhäva relationship with Kåñëa
in Svargaloka expands into the full-fledged upapati relationship. This is the
ultimate fulfilment.”

Vijaya, “What an extraordinary spiritual perception! I am truly overwhelmed with
joy. Kindly instruct me about the nitya-priyä-gopés.” 

Gosvämé, “Would Çré Gauracandra permit me to speak such esoteric realizations to
you if you were not an eligible candidate? Just mark how the greatest of
preceptors sarva-jïä Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has kept this subject matter extremely
confidential, revealing and elaborating these truths only rarely within his
commentaries and compositions such as the Kåñëa-sandarbha. He was always
apprehensive that unauthorized and non-eligible persons would pervert the
meaning of these arcane topics and seek authorization therein for their practice
of aberration. 

“Çréla Jéva Gosvämé was deeply concerned about the degenerate activities—such as
rasäbhäsa, incompatible mellows, and rasa-vikåti, distorted mellows—that
nowadays we see committed by bogus Vaiñëavas in the name of bhakti. Although he
was exceedingly cautious, such damage could not be totally prevented, so you
must be very careful not to disclose this philosophy to the undeserving. Let us
turn back to the subject of the nitya-priyä-gopés.”

Vijaya, “Who are the nitya-priya-gopés? Although I have studied many scriptures
in the past, I wish to learn everything from the sacred lips of my çikñä-guru
whose elucidations are so nectarean.”

Gosvämé, “Çrématé Rädhä and Çrématé Candrävalé are the foremost of the
nitya-priyä-gopés in Vraja, and like Kåñëa they are enchanting repositories of
divine attributes such as exquisite beauty, versatility, and rasa. They are
mentioned in the Brahma-Saàhitä, 5.37: 

änanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhävitäbhis
täbhir ya eva nija-rüpatayä kaläbhiù
goloka eva nivasaty akhilätma-bhüto
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi

“‘I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, residing in His own abode, Goloka, with
Rädhä, resembling His own spiritual figure, the embodiment of the hlädiné-çakti
possessed of the sixty-four transcendental arts in the company of Her
confidantes, who are the embodied extensions of Her bodily form, permeated and
vitalized by His ever-blissful spiritual rasa.’

“The Brahma-Saàhitä is considered to contain the essence of the Vedas and within
it Lord Brahmä cursorily mentions the nitya-priyä-gopés. From the statement of
Lord Brahmä it is clear that the nitya-priyä-gopés are eternal, transcendental
to material nature, and are manifestations of the spiritual potency. The
sixty-four supramundane activities and arts are a part of their eternal
pastimes. The commentaries of other äcäryas upon this verse …kaläbhiù
sväàça-rüpäbhiù çaktibhiù… may give other interpretations, but I have adhered to
the purport given by Çréla Svarüpa Dämodara Gosvämé, which is very profound and
reflects the deep insights of Çréla Rüpa, Çréla Sanätana, and Çréla Jéva.” 

Vijaya, “My ears want to hear the nectarean names of the nitya-priyä gopés.” 

Gosvämé, “Scriptures like the Skanda Puräëa and the Prahläda-saàhitä mention
names, such as Rädhä, Candrävalé, Viçäkhä, Lalitä, Çyämä, Padmä, Çaibyä,
Bhadrikä, Tärä, Viciträ, Gopälé, Dhaniñöhä and Pälé. 

“Candrävalé is also known as Somätä. Çrématé Rädhikä is also known as Gändharvä.
Other illustrious vraja-gopés are Khaïjanäkñé, Manoramä, Maìgalä, Vimalä, Lélä,
Kåñëä, Çäré, Viçäradä, Tärävalé, Cakoräkñé, Çaìkaré, and Kuàkumä.” 

Vijaya, “How are they related to each other?”

Gosvämé, “The nitya-priyä gopés are usually yütheçvarés, group leaders. There
are hundreds of yüthas and every yütha has millions of beautiful and qualified
gopés. All the aforementioned gopés from Çrématé Rädhikä to Kuàkumä are
yütheçvarés. In the çästra, the roles of Viçäkhä, Lalitä, Padmä, and Çaibyä have
been more elaborately portrayed than that of the other gopés. Amongst these
yütheçvarés, eight gopés, headed by Çrématé Rädhikä, have been designated as
pradhäna, most prominent and fortunate.”

Vijaya, “Viçäkhä, Lalitä, Padmä, and Çaibyä are some of the leading gopés,
proficient in enhancing Kåñëa’s pleasure in lélä. Why have they not been
unequivocally designated as distinct yütheçvarés?”

Gosvämé, “They are so highly accomplished that they are certainly worthy of
being yütheçvarés. However, Lalitä and Viçäkhä are so enchanted by Çrématé
Rädhikä’s mood of infinite loving ecstasy that they refuse the status of being
yütheçvarés independent of Çré Rädhä. Amongst the yütheçvarés, some are obedient
to Çrématé Rädhikä and others to Çrématé Candrävalé. This has been ascertained
by the scriptures.” 

Vijaya, “I have read that Lalitä has her own gaëa, sub-group of associates,
could you elucidate this matter?”

Gosvämé, “Çrématé Rädhikä is the yütheçvaré par excellence. Some of the gopés
from within her yütha are especially attracted to the special unique bhäva of
Çré Lalitä devé, and so they call themselves lalitä-gaëa, followers of Lalitä.
In a similar way, Viçäkhä devé has her viçäkhä-gaëa, followers of Viçäkhä. In
this way, the añöa-sakhé-gopés, headed by Lalitä and Viçäkhä, are the leaders of
particular gaëas, sub-groups, within the greater yütha of Çrématé Rädhikä. Only
by immense good fortune can one become a member of Çré Lalitä’s gaëa.” 

Vijaya, “Which scriptures contain the names of these gopés?” 

Gosvämé, “Their names are mentioned in various çästras such as the Padma Puräëa,
the Skanda Puräëa, the Uttara-khaëòa of the Bhaviñya Puräëa, as well as the
sätvata-vaiñëava-tantra çästras.” 

Vijaya, “The Çrémad Bhägavatam is certainly the crest jewel of all the
scriptures; if these glorious names were mentioned there, that would be a matter
of endless joy.”

Gosvämé, “The Çrémad Bhägavatam illumines tattva, the highest philosophical
truth, and, simultaneously, the unlimited ocean of nectarean rasa. The
rasikä-bhaktas, expert in tasting rasa, verify that the Çrémad Bhägavatam
supports all the variances of rasa-tattva. The name of Çrématé Rädhikä, the
identities of the gopés and their devotional moods have been revealed within the
Çrémad Bhägavatam in an extremely cryptic manner. If one scrutinizes the verses
of the Tenth Canto in the Çrémad Bhägavatam, everything is revealed there,
though Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé has purposely camouflaged these confidential
topics to keep the unauthorized materialists at bay. 

“My dear Vijaya, what good result will come of giving a neophyte a japa-mälä and
then explicit instructions in the most esoteric truths? Actually, the more
spiritually advanced a person becomes, the better he will understand the more
profound precepts. A real paëòita is able to present confidential spiritual
concepts cryptically so that they are revealed to the qualified, but hidden from
the unqualified. And thus, the hearer’s understanding of the subject will be
proportionate to his advancement in the subject. Most importantly, the highly
esoteric spiritual precepts cannot be grasped without the help of a bona fide
guru in çré-guru-paramparä, the line of authorized disciplic succession. And
without this connection, should anyone hear or study these subjects, his attempt
at knowledge will be impotent and bear no fruit. Study Ujjvala-nélamaëi
thoroughly and you will be able to detect all the rasas in the Çrémad
Bhagavatam.” 

At this point, after the many questions and answers, the day’s iñöagoñöhi ended,
and Vijaya left to walk slowly towards his quarters in Haracaëòi Sähi. Along the
way, he became immersed in the various rasas of the näyaka-näyikä-tattva that
are displayed in the spiritual realm. Sometimes, while considering the vidüñaka
and péöha-mardda companions of Kåñëa, the same bhävas overwhelmed him, filling
him with great exultation. At other times, thinking of Väàçé, Kåñëa’s
svayam-düté, incessant tears streamed down his face. The sublime bhävas of
Vraja, now visible upon the horizon of Vijaya’s heart, were becoming more and
more vibrant. Once again, the ecstatic vision he had had the previous night in
the sylvan woods on his way to Sundaräcala flashed intensely upon his heart.

Thus ends the thirty-second chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Mädhurya-rasa,
Part Two

JDH 33: Mädhurya-rasa, Part Three

Chapter Thirty-three
Mädhurya-rasa, Part Three

After having taken a dip in the sacred lake of Indradyumna Sarovara,
Vijaya-kumära and Vrajanätha returned home and ate their noon prasädam together.
Vrajanätha then decided to visit Çréla Haridäsa Öhäkura’s samädhi, and in the
meantime Vijaya-kumära went to the Rädhäkänta Mandira, where he offered his
prostrated obeisances to Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé and sat in respectful
expectation, waiting for a signal from his guru to speak. 

When Çréla Gosvämé was ready, Vijaya-kumära spoke as follows, “Gurudeva, the
daughter of Çré Våñabhänu Mahäräja, Våñabhänu-nandiné, Çrématé Rädhikä, is the
reigning mistress of my heart, my very life and soul are in Her hands.
Inexplicably, my heart melts at the very sound of Her name. Kåñëa, indeed, is
our sole refuge, yet, His pleasurable dalliances with Çré Rädhä are the most
relishable spiritual pastimes. Narrations where Çrématé Rädhikä is absent,
although they may contain descriptions of Kåñëa, seem colourless to me. 

“Gurudeva, may I frankly express something to you? I no longer feel like
introducing myself as Vijaya-kumära Bhaööäcärya; I enjoy thinking of myself
solely as the pälya-däsé, maidservant of Çrématé Rädhäräëé, entirely dependent
upon Her support. Another unique development that I find within myself is that I
abhor discussing vraja-lélä with materially engrossed persons. Assemblies
wherein persons speak without profound knowledge of rasa are unbearable to me. I
feel the urge to get up and leave.”

Gosvämé, “Certainly, you are most fortunate. Until a person acquires such
complete faith in his svarüpa as a vraja-gopé, he is not eligible to discuss the
intimate pastimes of Çré Rädhä and Çré Kåñëa. What to speak of devas, even devés
are not privileged to talk on such elevated topics.

“Earlier I spoke about the beloved consorts of Çré Kåñëa. Amongst all of them,
Çrématé Rädhä and Çrématé Candrävalé are the foremost. They both have millions
of yüthas of youthful gopés following them. In the mahä-räsa-lélä, countless
millions of exquisitely beautiful gopés dance gracefully within the
räsa-maëòala.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, let Candrävalé have her millions and millions of yüthas, but
kindly tell me the glories of Çrématé Rädhäräëé and cleanse my contaminated
heart and ears. As your surrendered disciple I earnestly request you to fill my
ears with this divine rasa.”

Gosvämé, “Ah yes! Between Rädhikä and Candrävalé, Çrématé Rädhä is
mahäbhäva-svarüpa, the embodiment of the unsurpassable pinnacle of bhäva. Thus,
She is superior in all respects to Candrävalé. The çruti scripture, the
Gopala-tapani Upaniñad, has glorified Her as Gändharvä. The Åk-pariçiñöa, the
final supplementary section of the Åg Veda, narrates how Mädhava, Kåñëa, becomes
more resplendent in the company of Çré Rädhikä. The Padma Puräëa records the
statement of Çré Närada Muni, ‘Çrématé Rädhikä’s kuëòa is as precious to Kåñëa
as Çré Rädhikä Herself, and, above all gopés, Çré Rädhä is Kåñëa’s most
beloved.” 

“What is rädhä-tattva, the philosophical truth regarding Çré Rädhä? Çrématé
Rädhikä is the embodiment and vital soul of the hlädiné-çakti of Çré Kåñëa,
which is the topmost amongst all His potencies.”

Vijaya, “This spiritual instruction is wonderful! In truth, what is the svarüpa
of Çrématé Rädhikä?”

Gosvämé, “Dearmost Çrématé Rädhikä, daughter of Çré Våñabhänu, is
suñöhu-käntä-svarupa, constantly served and decorated by sixteen çåìgära,
excellences of beauty, and twelve äbharaëas, embellishments.” 

Vijaya, “What is the meaning of suñöhu-käntä-svarupa?”

Gosvämé, “Possessing unsurpassable beauty, Rädhikä does not need any beauty
aids, make-up, or jewellery to enhance Her exquisite features. Her hair cascades
in curly locks around a lovely expressive lotus-like face that is beautified
with large, elongated eyes. The proportions of Her body are perfect: firm
breasts, a narrow waist, petite shoulders. Her nails glow like moonstone gems.
She is the perfection of unmatched, sublime beauty.”

Vijaya, “What are the sixteen different çåìgära?”

Gosvämé, “An elaborate bath; the brilliant gem on her nose ring; a blue sari;
the sash around Her waist; platted curly locks; dangling earrings; sandalwood
paste smeared upon Her body; flower arrangements in Her hair; a fine garland; a
lotus flower joyfully in hand; chewing betel leaf; a dot of kasturé, musk, upon
Her chin; käjala, mascara, around Her eyes; colourful designs painted upon Her
cheeks; feet painted with the red alta tint; and Her brow decorated with tilaka
are the sixteen çåìgäras shining with divine splendour upon the person of Çré
Rädhä.”

Vijaya, “What are the twelve äbharaëas?”

Gosvämé, “Fabulously precious gems in Her crown, golden earrings, a bejewelled
girdle around Her hips, a gem-studded golden locket around Her neck, Her upper
ears pierced with golden studs, a choker around Her throat, a variety of
sparkling rings upon Her fingers, a necklace with star designs, wristbands,
armlets, gem-studded ankle-bells, and toe-rings are the twelve äbharaëas basking
in the resplendent beauty of Çrématé Rädhikä.”

Vijaya, “What are the principal attributes of Çrématé Rädhikä?”

Gosvämé, “The Queen of Våndävana, Rädhäräëé, is, like Kåñëa, the treasure-trove
of endless excellences. The most prominent twenty-five qualities are (1)
mädhurya: She is sweetness personified, and extremely lovely to behold. (2)
nava-vayäù: She blossoms with the fresh youthfulness of adolescence. (3)
cala-apäìga: She has bright restless eyes. (4) ujjvala-smitä: Constantly, a
tender soft smile plays upon Her lips. (5) cäru-saubhägya-rekha-äòhyä: Beautiful
auspicious signs and lines mark Her body. (6) gandha-unmädita-mädhavä: Her
bodily fragrance enchants Kåñëa. (7) saìgéta prasara-abhijïä: She is an expert
musician and singer. (8) ramya-väk: She is practised in the art of pleasing
conversation. (9) narma-paëòitä: She possesses sparkling feminine wit and
humour. (10) vinétä: She is modest and gentle by nature. (11) karuëä-pürëä: She
is full of compassion and mercy. (12) vidagdhä: She is extremely intelligent and
transcendentally cunning. (13) päöava-anvitä: She is expert in performing Her
duties. (14) lajjä-çélä: She is shy. (15) su-maryädä: She is always respectful.
(16) dhairya: She is patient and calm and able tolerate pain and suffering. (17)
gämbhérya-çäliné: She is grave and sober. (18) su-viläsä-priya: She relishes
pastimes and is expert in enjoying life. (19) mahä-bhäva
parama-utkarña-tarñiëé-yukta: She is situated at the topmost level of
mahä-bhäva, ecstatic love, and always desirous to experience the same. (20)
gokula-prema-vasatiù: She is the embodiment and abode of vraja-prema; Her very
sight evokes spontaneous love in the residents of Gokula. (21)
jagat-çrené-lasadvasaù: She is the most famous devotee throughout creation. (22)
gurvarpita-snehaspäda: She is very affectionate to Her elders and always
receives their affection. (23) sakhé-praëayitä-vaçä: She is controlled by the
love and affection of Her girlfriends. (24) kåñëa-priya-ävalé-mukhyä: She is the
chief gopé and the most beloved of Kåñëa. (25) santata-äçrava-keçaväù: She
always keeps Kåñëa under Her control.”

Vijaya, “I wish to learn in detail the beautiful and auspicious signs and lines
that mark the transcendental body of Çrématé Rädhikä.”

Gosvämé, “The Varäha-saàhitä, jyoti-çästra, Käçé-khaëòa of the Skanda Puräëa,
Matsya Puräëa, and Garuda Puräëa have presented the following descriptions of
Her auspicious signs and lines:

“Upon the sole of Rädhikä’s left foot there are (1) at the base of the big toe
of the left foot, the auspicious mark of a yava, barleycorn; (2) a discus below
that; (3) a lotus flower at the base of the middle toe; (4) a flag and (5) a
banner below that; (6) the urdhva-rekha line beginning right of the middle toe
and extending up to the middle of the sole; and (7) an aìkuça, elephant goad, at
the base of the little toe.

“Upon the sole of Her right foot there are (1) a conchshell at the base of the
big toe; (2) a fish upon the heel; (3) a chariot above the fish; (4) an altar
throne at the base of the little toe, and above the fish is (5) a mountain; (6)
a coil like an earring; (7) a mace, and (8) a çakti symbol like a spear.”

“Upon the palm of Her left hand, the prominent lines are (1) the life line which
begins from between the index finger and middle finger and runs all the way to
below the little finger; (2) another line, starting below the life line extends
from the middle of outer side of the palm below the little finger and travels up
to between the index finger and thumb; and (3) at the base of the thumb,
starting from the wrist, a line curves up, to meet the middle line thus reaching
the mid-section between the thumb and index finger. The following marks are also
found upon the palm of the left hand: (4-8) a disc upon each fingertip, which
with the three lines add up to eight signs. Furthermore, there are: (9) an
elephant below the ring-finger; (10) a horse below the life-line; (11) a bull
below the middle-line; and (12) below the little finger, an elephant goad; plus
(13) a fan; (14) a bilva Çré Lakñmé bel fruit tree; (15) a post; (16) an arrow;
(17) a lance; and (18) a string of beads—thus making eighteen signs and lines.

“Upon the palm of Her right hand there are (1-3) the same three prominent lines
as on the left palm; plus (4-8) a conchshell on each finger-tip; (9) a yak-tail
cämara fan below the index finger; and (10) a goad; (11) a palace; (12) a
dundubhi, kettle drum; (13) a lightning bolt; (14) a pair of carts; (15) a bow;
(16) a sword; and finally (17) a water pot with a spout below the little finger.

“Thus, on the sole of the left foot there are seven signs, on the sole of right
foot eight signs, on the palm of the left hand eighteen signs, and on the right
hand seventeen signs. Therefore, altogether there are fifty auspicious marks and
lines.”

Vijaya, “Are any of these attributes possible in another person?”

Gosvämé, “These attributes are present in minute degrees in the jéva and
manifest to a higher degree in the devas and devés, but they are in absolute
fullness only in Çrématé Rädhikä. Çré Rädhikä’s every attribute is supramundane
and such attributes can never exist purely or completely in those souls
conditioned by material nature. What to speak of those in the mundane creation,
not even Parvaté, the consort of Çiva, and Gauré, the consort of Näräyaëa,
possess any of these attributes, either to perfection or to an absolute degree.”


Vijaya, “Yes, truly, Çrématé Rädhikä’s unsurpassable beauty and superexcellent
attributes are inconceivable; Her mercy alone can endow one with the ability to
perceive them.”

Gosvämé, “How can words describe Her beauty and excellences? Even Kåñëa is
enchanted by them, how can they be compared to anything else?”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, kindly tell me about Çrématé’s sakhés.”

Gosvämé, “Çrématé Rädhikä’s yütha are the finest. The gopés in her yütha are
embellished with all perfections, which help them to create an amorous and
romantic ambience to attract Çré Mädhava Kåñëa.” 

Vijaya, “How many types of sakhés has Çrématé Rädhikä?”

Gosvämé, “All in all there are five kinds: sakhé, friends; nitya-sakhé, eternal
friends; präëa-sakhé, friends as dear as life; priya-sakhé, dearmost friends;
and parama-preñöha-sakhé, supremely dear friends.”

Vijaya, “Who are sakhés?”

Gosvämé, “Kusumikä, Våndä, Dhaniñöhä are prominent sakhés.” 

Vijaya, “Who are nitya-sakhés?”

Gosvämé, “Kastüré, Maëimaïjaré, and others are nitya-sakhés.” 

Vijaya, “Who are präëa-sakhés?”

Gosvämé, “Some of the famous präëa-sakhés who identify closely with Çrématé
Rädhikä and often acquire a portion of Her svarüpata, beauty and features, are
Çaçimukhi, Väsanté, and Läsikä.” 

Vijaya, “Who are the priya-sakhés?” 

Gosvämé, “Some of the famous priya-sakhés are Kuräìgäkñé, Sumadhyä, Madanälasä,
Kamalä, Mädhuré, Muïjakeçé, Kandarpa-sundaré, Mädhavé, Mälaté, Käma-latä and
Çaçé-käla.” 

Vijaya, “Who are the parama-preñöha-sakhés?”

Gosvämé, “The parama-preñöha-sakhés, often assisting in the most confidential
pastimes of Çrématé Rädhä and Çré Kåñëa, are the añöa-sakhés, eight principal
sakhés: Lalitä, Viçäkhä, Citrä, Campaka-latä, Tuìga-vidyä, Indu-lekhä,
Raìgadevé, and Sudevé. According to the situation in the Divine Couple’s amorous
pastimes, they sometimes exhibit partiality towards Kåñëa, sometimes towards Çré
Rädhä.”

Vijaya, “Now I have a better concept of yütha, but what is the position of the
gaëa?”

Gosvämé, “Within every yütha are subgroups that are known as gaëa. Within
Çrématé Rädhikä’s yütha, for instance, is Lalitä devé and those who owe
allegiance to Lalitä devé are referred to as Lalitä’s gaëa.” 

Vijaya, “The paroòhä-bhäva is certainly an extremely exalted attribute of
vraja-gopés, but is there a situation where paroòha-bhäva is not worshipable?”

Gosvämé, “The distinction between male and female in the material world is
illusory. These designations are the results of fruitive actions in material
nature. The mäyä-çakti of the material nature is a breeding ground for
irreligious and low desires; therefore, åñis, munis, and gurus have forbidden
man-woman relationships outside the institution of marriage. In order to uphold
the pristine position of rasa and protect it under the shield of religious
marriage vows, the great åñis and munis have also gone a step further by
denouncing the paroòha-bhäva as depicted in the mundane literature of the
material world.

“However, rasa springing from transcendental paramour dalliance is pure and
eternal, whereas illicit relationship in the material world between the illusory
males and females is its perverted reflection. Mundane rasa is extremely limited
and bound by both the cultural rules of society and the regulations of scripture
that rightly exclude the conditioned jévas of this material world from paramour
relationships. 

“Kåñëa is sacidänanda-vigraha and is the sole puruña and näyaka. His
paroòha-bhäva that churns up the unlimited rasa of the spiritual platform is not
in the least impure or condemnable. Thus within this highest spiritual concept
of transcendental paramourship there is no room for the enactment of the prosaic
laws of the illusory material world that govern the institution of mundane
marriage. When the Hero of Goloka, Çré Kåñëa, manifests His Gokula-dhäma and the
supreme pärakiya-rasa upon earth, then the gopés of Gokula are above reproach
for exhibiting their transcendental paroòha-bhäva, even though illicit
relationship in ordinary mundane literature has been rightly censored.”

Vijaya, “What notable symptoms are manifest in the love of the gopés of Gokula
for Kåñëa?”

Gosvämé, “The gopés of Gokula perceive Kåñëa exclusively as the darling of Nanda
and Yaçodä. The symptoms of bhäva garnered from this natural, spontaneous,
passionate love and affection are even for learned devotees very difficult to
fathom, what to speak of for non-devotees and empiricists. In Nanda-nandana
Kåñëa, aiçvarya-bhäva is overwhelmed by an excess of mädhurya-bhäva. Even when
Kåñëa in jest and play displays His four-armed form, the gopés are apathetic
towards it, or even actually ignore it. Moreover, in the presence of Çrématé
Rädhikä, the four-armed form is quickly replaced by His two-armed original form
because of the compelling power of Her transcendental love. This supramundane
phenomenon is directly a consequence of Çré Rädhikä’s profound
pärakiya-rasa-bhäva.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I feel so very fortunate and I am ever grateful to you for
these explanations. Kindly explain the different näyikäs.”

Gosvämé, “There are three types of näyikäs: svakéya, married; pärakiya,
paramours; and sämänya, general. I have already spoken about the svakéya and
pärakiya näyikäs in spiritual rasa, so now I will delve into the
sämänya-näyikäs. The paëòitas of rhetoric, mundane literature and arts have
ascertained that the sämänya-näyikäs are prostitutes, only greedy for money.
Accordingly, the sämänya-näyikäs neither despise the characterless, unqualified
näyakas, nor love and respect those näyakas who are endowed with good qualities.
Their feigned love is not true, but described as çåìgäräbhäsa, a semblance of
love. However, Kubjä of Mathurä, generally considered to possess çåìgäräbhäsa,
should according to our spiritual authorities be placed on the level of pärakiya
because of the particular temperament towards Kåñëa that she developed.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, what is this particular temperament of Kubjä?”

Gosvämé, “When Kubjä was still ugly, disfigured, and unattractive she was never
in love or infatuated with anybody. Yet, upon beholding Kåñëa’s beautiful
features, she immediately felt a spontaneous urge to apply sandalwood paste to
His body and tugged at Kåñëa’s garment begging for His embrace. This was an
exhibition of rati analysed as being in the pärakiya mood. In contrast, the love
of the queens of Dvärakä is superior, because they always unselfishly desired to
give pleasure to Kåñëa. Since Kubjä’s love was mixed with selfish motives, it is
categorized as sädhäraëa, ordinary and general.”

Vijaya, “As Kubjä’s attraction to Çré Kåñëa can be considered to be pärakiya, I
now understand that the purely spiritual rasa of the näyikäs is divided into
only svakéya and pärakiya—within the sphere of these two what other specific
differences in mood are there?”

Gosvämé, “Both svakéya and pärakiya näyikäs are of three types: mugdhä,
captivated; madhyä, intermediate; and pragalbhä, imperious.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, because of your unlimited grace each time I meditate upon
transcendental rasa I see you as one of the vraja-gopés. At that moment, all
material designations of male and female disappear. Though I feel the
ramaëé-bhäva of the vraja-gopés, I am incapable of serving in an appropriate
manner. Thus, I am extremely keen to learn the different sentiments of the
various näyikäs. I wish to serve Kåñëa by garnishing my spiritual sentiments
with their particular service attitude, and I pray at your feet, kindly school
me in this subject. Therefore, please illuminate the nature of the
mugdhä-näyikä.”

Gosvämé, “Hear the symptoms of the mugdhä-näyikä: She is nava-yauvanä,
ever-fresh and most youthful, amorous and extremely feminine, her innocent
newly-found love enchants her. She leans very much towards the väma-bhäva,
leftist mood, wherein she tends to act contrary to the desires of her beloved.
She is submissive to her fellow sakhés and is very bashful in expressing her
love, but in private she is artfully meticulous in planning a meeting with her
beloved. If the näyaka is offensive or neglectful, she simply observes Him with
tearful eyes, neither speaking harshly nor sweetly, nor flying into mäna, a
withdrawn temper tantrum.”

Vijaya, “What is the nature of the madhyä-näyikä?”

Gosvämé, “The madhyä-näyikä’s great madana, amorous passion, for union with
Kåñëa is balanced by her shyness upon meeting Him. Nava-yauvanä, ever fresh and
in the prime of her youth, her speech tends to being occasionally pragalbhä,
intrepid and impertinent. Sometimes she is so passionate that her amorous play
transports her up to the ecstatic symptom of mürchä, loss of consciousness. Her
temper is at times mild, at other times severe, and when angry, she is of three
types: dhéra, passive and composed; adhéra, intolerant and restless; and
dhérädhéra, a mixture of both dhéra and adhéra. 

“When she is dhéra, the madhyä-näyikä coolly ridicules her errant beloved with
sarcastic words; as adhéra, she hurls abusive words in a rage; and when she is
dhérädhéra, she is moved to tears while speaking cuttingly to her beloved. The
madhyä-näyikä possesses a combination of the mugdhä mood and pragalbhä
temperament; hence, the pinnacle of all rasa is beautifully reposed in her.”

Vijaya, “What is the nature of the pragalbhä-näyikä?”

Gosvämé, “The pragalbhä-näyikä’s symptoms are as follows: She is pürna-yauvanä,
ever-fresh and in the full bloom of youth, she is proud, blinded by passion, and
extremely enthusiastic about romance. She knows the art of weaving a net
composed of a myriad of bhävas in which she entrances her lover. And upon
meeting her lover, she may even intimidate Him with the characteristic power of
her prema-rasa. Her speech and activities are serious and very mature, and when
she is angry, she is harsh and imperious. In such mäna, the pragalbhä-näyikä is
also of three kinds: dhéra, adhéra and dhérädhéra. 

“The dhéra-pragalbhä pretends to be indifferent to sambhoga, amorous pleasure,
keeping her emotions and feelings secret and is externally polite, respectful
and affectionate, whereas the adhéra-pragalbhä pitilessly rails at her lover,
caustically running him down. Finally, the dhérädhéra-pragalbhä-näyikä possesses
a very similar personality to that of the dhérädhéra-madhyä-näyikä.

“Both the madhyä and pragalbhä näyikä are further subdivided into jyeñöha,
senior, and kaniñöha, junior. Thus, there are jyeñöha-madhyä and
kaniñöha-madhyä, jyeñöha-pragalbhä and kaniñöha-pragalbhä. These distinctions of
jyeñöha and kaniñöha mirror the inflections and intensity of the praëaya, love,
of the individual näyikäs.”

Vijaya, “All in all, how many näyikäs are there?”

Gosvämé, “There are fifteen different näyikäs. First there is a further näyikä
that we have not yet mentioned, the kanyä-näyikä, unmarried heroine, who is very
young, is exclusively a mugdhä, and therefore of one kind. Then, as just
described, there are the three kinds of näyikäs: mugdhä, madhyä, and pragalbhä.
However, out of these three, the madhyä and pragalbhä näyikäs are further
subdivided thrice into dhéra, adhéra, and dhérädhéra—thus making, one mugdhä,
plus three madhyäs, plus three pragalbhäs, equalling seven. Then, we should
consider that this resultant seven maybe either svakéya or parakéya.
Consequently, seven svakéya-näyikäs, plus seven pärakiya-näyikäs, plus the one
kanyä-mugdhä-näyikä make a total of fifteen näyikäs.” 

Vijaya, “What are the different psychological conditions displayed by a näyikä?”

Gosvämé, “There are eight specific conditions: (1) abhisärikä, thinking, ‘I will
serve my lover,’ the näyikä fondly goes to the place of rendezvous; (2)
väsaka-sajjä, the näyikä proudly dresses in her best finery to receive her
lover; (3) utkaëöhitä, the näyikä is waiting in a state of eager anxiety to meet
her lover; (4) khaëòitä, the näyikä is offended by the late arrival of her lover
and notes evident signs of His infidelity; (5) vipralabdhä, the näyikä waits at
the place of rendezvous, but her lover does not arrive; (6) kalahäntaritä, the
näyikä sends her lover away in a jealous argument, but then becomes very
unhappy; (7) proñita-bhartåkä, the näyikä suffers greatly as her beloved has
gone abroad not to return even after many days; and (8) svädhéna-bhartåkä, the
näyikä dominates her obedient lover and they live together in peace. All fifteen
näyikäs display these eight symptoms.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, kindly further explain these conditions in more detail,
starting with the abhisärikä-näyikä.”

Gosvämé, “The abhisärikä-näyikä arranges an abhisära, tryst, with her näyaka and
then goes to the secret place of meeting. The näyikä, who goes to such a meeting
on a full moon night, in a white sari, is a jyotsnä ‘bhisärikä and the näyikä
who goes to such a meeting on a new moon night in a black sari is a tamo
‘bhisärikä. The abhisärikä-näyikä goes to her meeting decorated with jewellery
from head to feet; moving stealthily and silently, shyness and modesty cover her
body like a mantle, and she seeks a snigdha, sweet, gentle and affectionate
sakhé to accompany her.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly describe the väsaka-sajjä-näyikä.”

Gosvämé, “Väsaka-sajjä means to decorate the place of tryst and oneself in
expectation of the lover; hence, the näyikä who is acting in such a manner is
called a väsaka-sajjä-näyikä. She is determined to make amorous advances and
ploys in the presence of her lover. While she is eagerly awaiting his arrival,
she discusses His pastimes with her girl friends and repeatedly sends her female
messengers to discover the latest news of His expected arrival.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly describe the utkaëöhita-näyikä.”

Gosvämé, “When the näyikä becomes eager and extremely anxious because her lover
is late, though it is not His own fault, she is called an utkaëöhita-näyikä. Her
heart is burning, her body quivering and her mind continuously seeks the reason
for her lover’s absence. Feeling frustrated and irritated in all her activities,
she perspires profusely and speaks with everyone about her condition, shedding
tears of lamentation. 

“Eventually, the väsaka-sajjä-näyikä’s condition may transform into that of the
utkaëöhita-näyikä when she begins to brood over the thought that her late lover
may not come at all, having come under the spell and wiles of another näyikä. At
this stage, the anxiety of waiting and separation makes her utkaëöhita.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly describe the khaëòitä-näyikä.”

Gosvämé, “When the näyaka does not turn up at the designated time, but saunters
in at the end of the night with visible bodily marks of amorous play with
another näyikä, then the awaiting näyikä becomes khaëòitä, abandoned. She
expresses anger by releasing long sighs and, turning her face away from her
beloved, silently begins to sulk.”

Vijaya, “Kindly describe the vipralabdhä-näyikä.”

Gosvämé, “The vipralabdhä condition is brought about, when for reasons beyond
His control the näyaka does not meet the näyikä at the appointed tryst, which
was made definite through sign language, hints, or the like. A spectrum of
emotions washes over the most disappointed näyikä—feeling constantly the
crippling pangs of separation, she broods without pause, is full of remorse,
fretful thoughts plague her mind, she cries constantly, sighs heavily, and may
even loose consciousness through swoon.”

Vijaya, “Kindly describe the kalahäntaritä-näyikä.”

Gosvämé, “The kalahäntaritä-näyikä refuses to talk with the näyaka and angrily
spurns Him, even if He falls at her feet in the presence of other sakhés,
confessing Himself. Not allowing Him to touch her, she dismisses Him, rages in
delirium, beats her head in grief, feels debilitating languor, and breathes
heavily.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly describe the proñita-bhartåkä-näyikä.”

Gosvämé, “When the näyaka travels far away, the näyikä is in a state of
proñita-bhartåkä. She fills the emptiness of her lover’s absence by glorifying
Him, feels lonely and humble, grows thin, becomes pale with melancholy, is
restive, worries deeply, and becomes inert, not sleeping, dressing, or bathing
herself.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly describe the svädhéna-bhartåkä-näyikä.”

Gosvämé, “The svädhéna-bhartåkä-näyikä keeps her beloved enchanted, obedient,
and always near her. Therefore, according to her desire, with the näyaka, she is
engaged in pastimes in the forest, in sporting water games, and picking
flowers.” 

Vijaya, “The state of svädhéna-bhartåkä must be very blissful for the näyikä.” 

Gosvämé, “When the näyaka is spellbound by the prema of a
svädhéna-bhartåkä-näyikä to such an extent that He is unable to leave her
company even for a moment, she is called mädhavé, one who captures the heart of
her näyaka. Among the eight näyikäs just enumerated, three—svädhéna-bhartåkä,
väsaka-sajjä, and abhisärikä—are always joyful and decorated with numerous
jewellery and ornaments, whereas the other five näyikä—kaëòhitä, vipralabdhä,
utkaëöhita, proñita-bhartåkä, and kalahäntaritä—abstain from fineries and
ornaments and are often seen sitting disconsolately, resting their left cheeks
upon their clenched fists in deep melancholy with fretful worries that torment
their hearts.”

Vijaya, “What is the significance of being so tormented by kåñëa-prema?”

Gosvämé, “Kåñëa-prema is cinmaya, absolutely transcendental, and is thus always
paramänanda, supremely blissful. The apparent torment one experiences in loving
Kåñëa is simply another form of this paramänanda even though outwardly it may
appear most unpleasant. In the material world, torments are undoubtedly
excruciating, but in the spiritual realm, they are a variant form of änanda. One
who experiences spiritual torment in kåñëa-prema perceives only a current of
transcendental bliss within the heart since such emotions are caused by deep
immersion in cinmaya-rasa, transcendental mellow. This transcendent experience
cannot be expressed adequately by words.”

Vijaya, “What are the gradations of kåñëa-prema in these various näyikäs?”

Gosvämé, “The näyikäs are grouped into three categories according to their
varying intensity of prema for Vrajendranandana Kåñëa. They are uttama, topmost;
madhyama, intermediate; and kaniñöha, junior. It should be understood that Kåñëa
reciprocates with the different näyikäs in accordance with the intensity of
their prema.”

Vijaya, “What are the symptoms of the uttama-näyikäs?”

Gosvämé, “The uttama-näyikä is prepared to give up all her dharmas no matter how
important they may be simply to give even a moment’s pleasure to her beloved. If
ever the näyaka should cause her pain and sorrow, she never retaliates or shows
malice. Moreover, if she hears even fabricated or joking stories that her näyaka
is in distress, her heart aches.” 

Vijaya, “What are the symptoms of the madhyama-näyikä?”

Gosvämé, “The madhyama-näyikä is one who is pained when she hears that her
näyaka is troubled.” 

Vijaya, “What are the symptoms of the kaniñöha-näyikä?”

Gosvämé, “The kaniñöha-näyikä displays the tendency to be suspicious and fearful
of the impediments—such as embarrassing public opinion—that check her from
meeting her beloved näyaka, Kåñëa.”

Vijaya, “How many types of näyikäs are there all in all?”

Gosvämé, “There are three hundred and sixty types of näyikäs. The first set of
fifteen näyikäs multiplied by the eight moods makes one hundred and twenty, and
this further multiplied by the three intensities just mentioned makes three
hundred and sixty types.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I have followed your explanations on the different näyikäs
and now I am eager to know more about the various and divergent personalities of
the many yütheçvarés.”

Gosvämé, “Yütheçvarés are of three kinds: svapakña, friends; vipakña, enemies;
and taöasthä, neutrals. They are again divided into three sections according to
their saubhägya, good fortune: adhika, greater; samä, moderate; and laghu,
light. And again, they are further divided into three categories according to
their temperament: prakharä, harsh; madhyä, moderate; and mådvé, sweet and soft.
The prakharä-yütheçvarés express their loving sorrow and anger in the mood of
pragalbhä, boldness and guilelessness. Those whose words are the least pragalbhä
are the mådvé-yütheçvärés, who speak very sweetly. The speech of the
madhyä-yütheçvärés is in-between these two. 

“The adhika-yütheçvärés are further subdivided into ätyantiké, the ultimate in
qualification; and äpekñiké, highly qualified. The one who is unparalleled and
unsurpassable in all respects is the ätyantiké-adhika-yütheçväré. This position
belongs to Rädhikä alone. She is also madhyä by nature and has no equal in Vraja
or anywhere else throughout the entire creation.”

Vijaya, “Which yütheçvärés come under the category of äpekñiké-adhika, the
second level of qualification?”

Gosvämé, “The apekñiki-adhika-yütheçvärés are comparatively superior to one or
more of the other yütheçvärés.”

Vijaya, “Who are the ätyantiké-laghu-yütheçvärés?”

Gosvämé, “The ätyantiké-laghu-yütheçväré is inferior to all the other
yütheçvärés, whereas all yütheçvärés are inferior to the sole
ätyantiké-adhika-yütheçväré, Çré Rädhikä. Aside from the ätyantiké-laghu, all
the yütheçvärés are adhikä. Therefore, there is no question of the
ätyantiké-adhikä-yütheçväré, Çré Rädhä, being equal or inferior to any other
yütheçvaré. Similarly, there is no question of the ätyantiké-laghu-yütheçväré
being superior to anyone else. There is just one type of samä-laghu. However,
the madhyä-yütheçvärés are further sub-grouped into nine divisions. Thus, there
are twelve divisions of yütheçvärés: (1) ätyantiké-adhika; (2) samä-laghu; (3)
adhika-madhyä; (4) samä-madhyä; (5) laghu-madhyä; (6) adhika-prakharä; (7)
samä-prakharä; (8) laghu-prakharä; (9) adhika-mådvé; (10) samä-mådvé; (11)
laghu-mådvé; and (12) ätyantiké-laghu.” 

Vijaya, “I would like to know about the different dütés, female messengers?”

Gosvämé, “Dütés are most important for the näyikäs, because the näyikäs are
deeply hankering for the company of their beloved Kåñëa and the dütés help them
to attain this goal. Dütés are of two kinds: svayam-düté, messengers who act on
their own behalf and upon their own initiative; and äpta-düté, messengers who
carry the confidential intimations of another.”

Vijaya, “Kindly describe the svayam-düté.”

Gosvämé, “On account of the ardent desire caused by anuräga, the näyikä
sometimes sheds her shyness; she is enamoured by love for the näyaka and thus
personally expresses her own loving bhäva to Him. Thus, she enters the role of
svayam-düté. These sentiments are expressed in the form of abhiyoga,
intimations, in three ways: käyika, by bodily gestures; väcika, by speech; and
cakñuñä, by glances of the eyes.”

Vijaya, “What is väcika-abhiyoga?”

Gosvämé, “Väcika-abhiyoga is expressed in vyaìga, a form of speech that subtly
carries hints and suggestions giving vent to the feelings of the heart. Vyaìga
is of two kinds: çabda-vyaìga, the hint is given by the words and their
intonation; and artha-vyaìga, the hint is given by hidden meanings in the words.
Sometimes Kåñëa is the subject of the vyaìga, and sometimes the vyaìga pretends
to be related to something else.”

Vijaya, “In what way does Kåñëa become the subject of vyaìga?”

Gosvämé, “Vyaìga works in two ways when making Kåñëa its subject: säkñät,
direct; and vyapadeça, upon pretext.”

Vijaya, “What is säkñät-vyaìga, a direct hint?”

Gosvämé, “Säkñät-vyaëga is of many types, but mainly three: garva, words of
praise; äkñepa, words of accusation and lamentation; and yäcïä, words conveying
yearning and requests.”

Vijaya, “Kindly explain äkñepa-vyaìga, words of accusation and lamentation.”

Gosvämé, “Äkñepa-vyaëga leads to two other varieties of lovelorn vyaìga:
çabdottha, one using the sound of words; and arthottha, one using poetic
meanings of words. You are a student of alaìkära wherein poets have used the
same, therefore I think citing examples is unnecessary.”

Vijaya, “Yes, that is correct. Kindly elucidate yäcïä-vyaìga, allusions carrying
requests?”

Gosvämé, “Yäcïä-vyaìga is also of two types: svärtha, in one’s self-interest;
and parärtha, in the interest of another. In svärtha-yäcïä, the düté requests
for herself, and in parärtha-yäcïä she faithfully conveys the requests of
somebody not present. Both these yäcïä-vyaìga are embellished with çabda-vyaìga,
hints by word intonation, and artha-vyaìga, hints by hidden meanings. When bhäva
is united with the words, it becomes saìketika-yäcïä, emblematic yearning.” 

Vijaya, “Thus far we have heard mostly about säkñät-vyaìga, which I have
understood. The çabda-vyaìga, suggestions by word intonation, and artha-vyaìga,
suggestions by word meanings, are present in the näyikä’s speech when she
addresses Kåñëa directly with abhiyoga-väkya, messages, requests, or complaints.
These have been expressed in plays and dramas by authors and poets through the
clever use of words and their nuances. How is vyapadeça used in vyaìga?”

Gosvämé, “The word vyapadeça is a technical term derived from the word apadeça,
disguise or pretext, that is found in alaìkära-çästra. Vyapadeça factually means
to use some other topic as a pretext to convey a confidential matter. 

“The direct meaning of a speech spoken to Kåñëa by the näyikä will convey the
obvious, but by the employment of vyapadeça-vyaìga a second meaning is implied.
Such language will carry a secret prayer longingly soliciting Kåñëa’s company
and the opportunity to serve Him; this is the definition of vyapadeça. Also
sometimes this form of speech is artfully conveyed for a sakhé by her faithful
düté.” 

Vijaya, “I see. Vyapadeça is a form of artful speech full of secret intimations
whose hidden meaning carries a yäcïä, request. This, I have understood, now if
there is more, kindly explain.” 

Gosvämé, “Yes, there is another specific kind of expression that also uses
pretext, known as puruña-viñaya-gata-viyoga. When the näyikä speaks to Kåñëa and
considers that, ‘He seems to be listening, but perhaps He is really not.’ Then
she begins to speak about a nearby bird, beast, or tree. This is known as
puruña-viñaya-gata-viyoga, addressing some other entity in the presence of the
näyaka to attract His attention and convey a meaning. This is also of the two
types: çabdottha, using the intonation of words; and arthottha, using the poetic
meanings of words.”

Vijaya, “By your grace, I have understood messages carried by words. Now kindly
elaborate upon käyika-abhiyoga, messages conveyed through body language.”

Gosvämé, “Käyika-abhiyoga is done in the presence of Kåñëa; in many ways the
body of the sakhé may send signals to Him. Gesturing with the fingers, moving
quickly upon some pretext, covering one’s body out of apparent fear or shyness,
drawing figures upon the ground with one’s toe, scratching one’s ears, appearing
to apply tilaka as a symbol of chastity, playing about with one’s dress, playing
with one’s necklace, making one’s eyebrows dance, embracing a sakhé, chastising
a sakhé, biting one’s lips, stringing a necklace, jingling one’s ornaments,
displaying one’s armpits by raising one’s arms, embracing a tree upon which one
has etched Kåñëa’s name, and similar movements are all käyika or
äìgika-abhiyoga, messages through bodily language.” 

Vijaya, “What are cakñuñä-abhiyoga?” 

Gosvämé, “Smiling with one’s eyes, half opening one’s eyes, making one’s eyes
dance, expressing hesitation with one’s eyes, looking out of the corner of one’s
eyes, glancing with only the left eye, crooked and squinted glances, and the
like are messages and feelings conveyed through one’s eyes.”

Vijaya, “So far you have described the svayam-düté, the one who gives messages
on her own behalf, very systematically, but briefly, knowing well that there are
unlimited types of svayam-düté. However, who are the äpta-dütés, those who carry
the messages of another, and how many types are there?”

Gosvämé, “Those sakhés who would never breach another sakhé’s trust and leak out
confidential matters, even at the point of death, are called äpta-dütés. They
are extremely affectionate, loyal and superb conversationalists. Only such
versatile young gopés endowed with all virtues are the favoured dütés of the
vraja-näyikäs.” 

Vijaya, “How many types of äpta-dütés are there?”

Gosvämé, “There are three types of äpta-dütés: amitärthä, the possessor of
wonderful tactics; nisåñöärthä, the possessor of witty arguments; and
pätra-häri, the bearer of confidential letters. The amitärthä-düté is skilfully
aware of the implications conveyed by innuendoes and hints; using these with
great skill, she immediately arranges a rendezvous between her mistress and her
beloved. The nisåñöärthä-düté brings the lovers to union by witty logic and
clever persuasion. The faithful pätra-häri-düté is a carrier of confidential
written messages.” 

Vijaya, “Are there any more types of äpta dütés?”

Gosvämé, “Çilpa-käriëé, artists; daiva-jïä, astrologers; liìgiëé, ascetic
brähmaëa girls; paricärikä, maidservants; dhätreyé, nursemaids; vana-devé, the
goddesses of the Våndävana forest; the sakhés; and many others are also
considered äpta-dütés. The çilpa-käriëé-dütés, artists, use their talents in
drawing and painting to express the feelings of the lovers for union, thus
propitiating their rendezvous. The daiva-jïä, astrologers, use their
astrological knowledge to guide the lovers to a secret union at an auspicious
time. The liìgiëé, brähmaëa girls and ascetics such as the tapasviëé,
Paurëamäsé, use their knowledge and social position to remove obstacles to the
fulfilment of the lovers. In addition, there are many paricärikä, maidservants,
such as Lavaìga-maïjaré and Bhänumaté, faithfully and brilliantly arranging the
meeting of the lovers. The dhätreyé are women who have been nursemaids to Çré
Rädhä and the other gopés; with great loyalty, they arrange meetings. The
vana-devé, the adhiñöhätré-devés, presiding deities of the Våndävana forest,
carefully carry messages between the lovers. The devoted sakhés have been
mentioned earlier; they and many other gopés also act as äpta-dütés. As the need
arises, they may become väcika-dütés, conveying messages spoken directly with
unequivocal meanings, and they may also become vyaìga-dütés, delivering messages
in çabda-vyaìga, intimations given by word intonation, and artha-vyaìga,
intimations given by hidden poetic meanings. The complete gamut of abhiyoga
conveyed to the näyaka by all these dütés is vyapadeça, statements with a hidden
meaning; çabda-müla, the intonation of words; artha-müla; direct poetic word
meanings; praçaàsa, words of praise; äkñepa, words of lamentation; and yäcïä,
words conveying yearnings and requests.” 

Vijaya-kumära keenly absorbed this esoteric analysis of the different types of
intimate devotional service. Offering prostrated obeisances at his guru’s lotus
feet, he begged permission to leave. While he was slowly walking home, his mind
was alive and enthralled in deliberation upon all the most esoteric knowledge he
had just received.

Thus ends the thirty-third chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Mädhurya-rasa,
Part Three

JDH 34: Mädhurya-rasa, Part Four

Chapter Thirty-four
Mädhurya-rasa, Part Four

Vijaya Kumära finished his midday meal early and as usual went to meet his guru
in the house of Käçé Miçra. Having some spare time, he went to the beachfront
and strolled along by the ocean, where the sparkling waves caught his attention,
bringing to his mind thoughts of the ocean of devotional rasa. “This ocean is
stirring up spiritual emotion within my heart. Though material, it is awakening
and bringing to the fore hidden transcendental sentiments like those in
Gurudeva’s descriptions of rasa. One day, my gross and subtle bodies will have
melted into oblivion, and I will stand before the ocean of rasa relishing my
maïjaré-svarüpa, spiritual identity as a beautiful young girl of Vraja.

“Kåñëa whose complexion resembles the luminous dark hue of fresh monsoon clouds
is the sole proprietor of my heart. Beside Him is the darling daughter of Çré
Våñabhänu Mahäräja, Çrématé Rädhikä. She is my Ladyship, eternally enthroned
within my heart. The amorous exchanges between Çré Rädhä and Çré Kåñëa have
metamorphosed into this ocean before me. The unbroken scrolls of waves are the
gamut of bhäva rising from the ocean of rasa. Whenever a wave of bhäva peaks,
the ocean heaves me, a sakhé, upon the shore, sweeping me about by its currents
and anointing me with a deluge of kåñëa-prema. This ocean of rasa is Kåñëa
Himself; therefore, the ocean’s complexion is the same as that of Kåñëa. The
cresting waves of divine love are Çré Rädhä, making the colour of the waves a
beautiful molten-gold. The larger waves are the sakhés, and the smaller ones are
their assistants, the maïjarés. Myself, I am the smallest of waves, far away,
wishing to be called to service of the maïjarés.” 

Enraptured by this beautiful meditation, Vijaya-kumära’s consciousness slowly
returned to his immediate external surroundings as he walked away from the ocean
and headed for the Rädhäkänta temple at the house of Käçé Miçra. Arriving there,
he offered prostrated obeisances to his guru and sat down humbly.”

Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé received him with warm affection, saying, “Dear
Vijaya, is everything well with you?”

Vijaya, “Çréla Gurudeva, your mercy is the only cause of my good fortune. I
sincerely wish to serve the sakhés and so I would like to learn the subtle
variations in personality amongst them.” 

Gosvämé, “Vijaya, you must realize that it is impossible for any jéva to
describe the transcendental attributes of the sakhés in full; however, whatever
fraction we have learnt is by the mercy of Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé. The sakhés are
the lovely damsels of Vraja, perfectly augmenting Kåñëa’s transcendental amorous
pastimes, and are the reservoirs of trustworthiness towards the Divine Couple of
Våndävana. Only a few most fortunate and blessed souls develop the eagerness to
discover all information about them. 

“Yesterday, I touched upon the different types of sakhés with you. As we have
mentioned, the sakhés in their individual yüthas are divided into three
according to the status of their position and skill: adhikä, greatest fortune
and dexterity; samä, intermediate position; and laghu, light in dexterity and
position. In addition, they may be divided according to their temperament:
prakharä, of imperious temperament; madhyä, of intermediate temperament; and
mådvé, of soft, sweet, and compliant temperament. Here is Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé’s
comment in the Ujjvala-nélamaëi, Sakhé-prakaraëa 3-5:

prema saubhägya-sad guëyädy-adhikyäd adhikä sakhé
samä tat sämyato jïeyä tal-laghutvät tathä laghuù

“‘The sakhés are replete with the supramundane good fortune of prema and
decorated with all-immaculate excellences. When such characteristics are
abundant in certain sakhés, they are called adhikä, when the characteristics are
of moderate intensity, they are called samä, and when they are of less
intensity, they are known as laghu.’

durllaëghya-väkya-prakharä prakhyätä gauravocitä
tad-ünatve bhaven-mådvé madhyä tat samyam ägatä

“‘Sakhés whose orders nobody dares to transgress are known as prakharä; they are
dignified and grave. When the gravity and dignity of personality are much less
than in the prakharä-sakhés, the sakhés are known as mådvé-sakhés, and when they
are of a middling temperament, they are called madhyä-sakhés.’ 

ätyantikädhikatvädi-bhedaù pürvavad atra saù
sva-yüthe yütha-näthaiva syäd aträtyantikädhikä
sä kväpi prakharä yüthe kväpi madhyä måduù kvacit 

“‘The top group of sakhés is also separated into ätyantika, very greatest, and
äpekñika, highest. Only the head personality of the yütha is known as the
ätyantika-adhikä-sakhé; and in the various yüthas, she is sometimes of prakharä
temperament, sometimes of madhyä temperament, and at other times of mådvé
temperament.’”

Vijaya, “The ätyantika-adhikä-yütheçväré is the leader of her group. She is one
of three categories: prakharä, madhyä, and mådvé. We have spoken earlier about
them. Kindly tell me what differentiates the numerous types of sakhés from one
another within the yüthas.” 

Gosvämé, “In a yütha only the yütheçväré is ätyantika-adhikä. The other sakhés
are classified into three sections, äpekñikä-adhikä, äpekñikä-samä, and
äpekñikä-laghu, thus making a total of nine varieties when multiplied by the
three temperaments of prakharä, madhyä, and mådvé. These nine varieties are: (1)
äpekñika-adhikä-prakharä; (2) äpekñika-adhikä-madhyä; (3) äpekñika-adhikä-mådvé;
(4) äpekñika-samä-prakharä; (5) äpekñika-samä-madhyä; (6) äpekñika-samä-mådvé;
(7) äpekñika-laghu-prakharä; (8) äpekñika-laghu-madhyä; and (9)
äpekñika-laghu-mådvé.

“Ätyantika-sakhés are of two more kinds: ätyantika-samä, and ätyantika-laghu.
These two plus the yütheçväré herself, who is ätyantika-adhikä, plus the nine
äpekñika sakhés, makes twelve types of näyikäs, or sakhés that are found in each
yütha, camp.”

Vijaya, “How are the more prominent sakhés classified?” 

Gosvämé, “Sakhés like Lalitä belong to the yütha of Çrématé Rädhikä, and are
classified as äpekñikä-adhikä-prakharä. In the same yütha, Viçäkhä and others
are in the category of äpekñiki-adhikä-madhyä, and Citrä, Mädhuré, and others
are äpekñika-adhikä-mådvé. However, in comparison to Çrématé Rädhikä, the
añöa-sakhés headed by Lalitä devé are äpekñika-laghu, relatively of lesser
status.” 

Vijaya, “Are there any classifications within the apekñiki-laghu-prakharä?”

Gosvämé, “Yes, there are two types: vämä, left wing, contrary; and dakñiëä,
right wing, submissive.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, what are the characteristics of the vämä-sakhés.” 

Gosvämé, “The vämä sakhés are imperious by nature and when they feel slighted
they quickly embrace the loving sentiment of mäna, withdrawn temper tantrum that
does not easily wane away. Further, they do not submit easily to the wishes of
the näyaka. These are the characteristics of the vämä-sakhés, such as Lalitä
devé, who is a vämä-prakharä gopé in Çrématé Rädhikä’s yütha.”

Vijaya, “What are the characteristics of the dakñiëa-sakhés.” 

Gosvämé, “The näyikäs who rarely exhibit mana, honestly opening their hearts to
the näyaka, and who are easily captivated by His sweet words, are known as
dakñiëa-sakhés. In Çrématé Rädhikä’s yütha, Tuìgavidyä is described as a
dakñiëa-prakharä sakhé.” 

Vijaya, “Who are the ätyantika-laghu sakhés?”

Gosvämé, “The sakhés who are always mild, gentle, and are very junior, such as
Kusumikä and many others, are called ätyantika-laghu.” 

Vijaya, “In what manner do the sakhés act as dütés?”

Gosvämé, “When the sakhés act as dütés, they arrange the abhisära, tryst, of the
näyaka and näyikä by carrying communications between the lovers, who are at that
time apart from one another.” 

Vijaya, “Do the sakhés ever attain the position of a näyikä?”

Gosvämé, “The yütheçvärés are eternally näyikäs. The characteristics of the
apekñiki-adhikä-prakharä, apekñiki-adhikä-madhyä, and apekñiki-adhikä-mådvé
sakhés place them in both categories as näyikä and sakhé. When gopés of a
relatively junior laghu status are present, they may assume the role of näyikä;
however, when a gopé of relatively superior adhikä status is present, they
assume the role of sakhé. To their junior sakhés, they are seen as näyikäs;
therefore, they are allocated the unique status of being näyikä-präya, almost
näyikäs.

“The apekñiki-samä-prakharä, apekñiki-samä-madhyä, and apekñiki-samä-mådvé
sakhés are sakhés in relationship to those who are adhikä, superiors, and are
näyikäs in relationship to those who their laghu, juniors; thus they also play
dual roles and are so known as dvi-samä. 

“The gopés in the categories of apekñiki-laghu-prakharä, apekñiki-laghu-madhyä,
and apekñiki-laghu-mådvé generally maintain the position of sakhés. 

“The ätyantika-laghu sakhés are junior to both their yütheçväré and the just
mentioned three categories of sakhés; therefore, they comprise a fifth class and
are called nitya-sakhés, eternal sakhés. 

“In the presence of the yütheçväré, the apekñiki group of sakhés are both sakhés
and dütés, but never näyikäs. 

“The ätyantika-laghu—nitya-sakhés—are always sakhés; from their point of view
all are näyikäs and never dütés.” 

Vijaya, “Who are the sakhés that act as dütés?”

Gosvämé, “The yütheçvärés are eternal näyikäs, they are everyone’s favourite and
beloved, and consequently all the members of their yütha act on their behalf.
The sakhés of the yütha who are especially dear to the yütheçväré are engaged in
transmitting messages on her behalf. However, sometimes the role is reversed and
the yütheçväré herself acts as a gauëa-düté, secondary messenger, for her
favourite sakhés in their amorous interplays; this she does in response to the
praëaya, intimate love, of these sakhés for her, the yütheçväré. When we speak
of the yütheçväré gracefully accepting the role of a gauëa-düté, we mean that
the yütheçvaré gives indications and messages to the näyaka but does not perform
the primary activity of a düté that is carry messages for some distance. These
messages are, in relation to Kåñëa, of two types: samakña, directly when Kåñëa
is present; and parokña, indirectly when Kåñëa is absent.” 

Vijaya, “Are there different types of kåñëa-samakña-dütyä, messages given to
Kåñëa in His presence?”

Gosvämé, “They are divided into two kinds: saìketika, emblematic hints and
signals; and väcika, direct verbal indications.”

Vijaya, “What are saìketika-dütyä?”

Gosvämé, “When indication is given to Kåñëa that He should go to a meeting with
a näyikä by signs such as winking, raising of eyebrows, and crooking the index
finger we speak of saìketika dütyä.”

Vijaya, “What are väcika-dütyä?”

Gosvämé, “Messages that are spoken to Kåñëa—whether directly and openly, or in
seclusion—are known as väcika.” 

Vijaya, “What is parokña-dütyä, messages given when Kåñëa is absent?”

Gosvämé, “Parokña-dütyä is when the sakhé is brought and offered to Kåñëa by her
friend, or when the sakhé is sent to meet Kåñëa by her friend.”

Vijaya, “What are the näyikä-präya dütyä, messages carried for the almost
näyikä?”

Gosvämé, “When äpekñiki-adhikä-prakharä, äpekñiki-adhikä-madhyä, and
äpekñiki-adhikä-mådvé sakhés act as dütés for their respectively junior laghu
sakhés, they are said to be acting as näyikä-präya-dütés, almost-heroine
messengers. Amongst them the samä-sakhés and madhyä-sakhés are naturally
friends; they are extremely affectionate to each other and are known for these
mutual tender-sweet dealings. Only the most elevated pure souls realized in
prema can perceive these subtleties.” 

Vijaya, “What are the sakhé-präya-dütyä, messages carried by one who is almost a
sakhé?”

Gosvämé, “Usually the laghu-prakharä, laghu-madhyä, and laghu-mådvé gopés are
engaged in carrying messages; hence, when engaged in this activity, they are
called sakhé-präya-düté, almost sakhé messengers.” 

Vijaya, “What then are the nitya-sakhés.”

Gosvämé, “Nitya-sakhés desire only to be sakhés and not näyikäs. They are of two
types: ätyantika-laghu and äpekñika-laghu.” 

Vijaya, “Are traits such as prakharä, imperious nature, permanent, eternal
traits in particular sakhés—qualities that they always manifest and never
abandon?”

Gosvämé, “Although indeed certain personality traits are svabhäva, permanently
possessed, by the sakhés, however under certain circumstances, these traits may
be abandoned and even the opposite manifested. Lalitä, for instance, is
extremely tender and concerned when sweetly calming Çrématé Rädhikä to dissolve
Her mäna.”

Vijaya, “It appears that Çrématé Rädhikä carefully arranges the meeting of her
sakhés with Çré Kåñëa.”

Gosvämé, “Vijaya, there is something strictly confidential about this topic.
Rädhikä does arrange meetings of Her sakhés with Kåñëa, however, if any sakhé
sent as a düté to Kåñëa—even in lonely spots where Kåñëa may seek romantic
intimacy with her—were to succumb to Kåñëa’s advances, then the trust and faith
placed in her ability and uprightness as a messenger would be irreparably
damaged. Therefore, in the role of acting as a düté for her beloved sakhé, the
dütés never succumb to Kåñëa’s romantic entreaties.”

Vijaya, “What are the primary activities of the sakhés?”

Gosvämé, “There are sixteen such activities: (1) to describe the wonderful
qualities of the näyikä to the näyaka and vice versa; (2) to encourage and
enhance the näyikä and näyaka’s attachment for each other; (3) to arrange secret
rendezvous for the näyikä and näyaka; (4) to offer the näyikä to Kåñëa; (5) to
make fun and cut jokes with the näyikä and näyaka; (6) to give consolation to
the lovelorn näyikä or näyaka; (7) to beautifully decorate the näyikä before her
meeting; (8) to expertly draw out and describe the emotions and inner feelings
of the näyikä and näyaka for each other; (9) to cover up any of the näyikä and
näyaka’s mistakes and oversights; (10) to educate the näyikä and näyaka on how
to bluff the husband, mother, and other relatives to facilitate Their
rendezvous; (11) to bring the näyaka and näyikä together at the appropriate
time; (12) to serve Them by fanning with cämara and peacock fan, etc; (13) to
reproach the näyikä and näyaka at particular instances when They may have become
inimical to one another; (14) to send and carry messages between the näyikä and
näyaka; (15) to selflessly protect the näyikä’s life; and (16) to be attentive
and diligent about even the smallest details of service.

“All these activities can be described through examples. Would you like to hear
them?”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, you have given me clear ideas and guidelines in these brief
descriptions; I will read the examples in the Ujjvala-nélamaëi by Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé. O master, now I am eager to hear about the loving exchanges between
Kåñëa and the sakhés and the affection of the sakhés for one another.”

Gosvämé, “The svapakña-sakhés, sakhés belonging to a friendly group, are of two
kinds: asama-sneha, possessing unequal affection towards Kåñëa and towards their
yütheçväré; and sama-sneha, possessing equal affection towards Kåñëa and towards
their yütheçväré.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly describe the sakhés who have asama-sneha, unequal affection.”

Gosvämé, “The asama-sneha sakhés are also of two kinds: Some sakhés are more
attached and affectionate to their yütheçväré than to Kåñëa. They consider, ‘I
am the maidservant of my sakhé,’ and love their yütheçväré more than Kåñëa. They
are called sakhé snehädhika.

“Others consider, ‘I am hari-däsé, the maidservant of Kåñëa,’ and are more
attached and affectionate to Kåñëa than to their yütheçväré. They are fully
loyal and affectionate to their own yütheçväré, and yet their love for Kåñëa is
greater. They are called kåñëa snehädhika.

“Generally, the two types mingle with other sakhés of similar leaning.”

Vijaya, “Which sakhés belong to these categories?”

Gosvämé, “Amongst the five varieties of sakhés that we have discussed earlier,
the sakhés who are kåñëa snehädhika, more affectionate to Kåñëa, are called the
sakhés. While those who are sakhé snehädhika, more affectionate to their sakhé,
are the präëa-sakhés and nitya-sakhés.”

Vijaya, “Who are the sama-sneha sakhés?”

Gosvämé, “Sakhés who possess equal affection for Kåñëa and for their yütheçväré
are sama-sneha sakhés.”

Vijaya, “Which sakhés are praised as the best?”

Gosvämé, “The topmost sakhés joyfully consider themselves Rädhä’s nija-jana,
followers and recipients of her love, and simultaneously possess equal love for
Çrématé Rädhikä and Çré Kåñëa. They are the priya-sakhés and parama-preñöha
sakhés.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, kindly explain the rivalries between the sakhés who take the
different stances known as pakña, favourable; and prati-pakña or vipakña,
unfavourable.” 

Gosvämé, “Relative to one another, all the vraja-sundarés can be divided into
four groups: sva-pakña, of one’s own yütha; suhåt-pakña, of friendly yüthas;
taöasthä-pakña, of neutral yüthas; and prati-pakña, of enemy yüthas. The various
yüthas associate with other yüthas that are their suhåt-pakña, friends, and
taöasthä-pakña, neutrals, but carefully avoid their prati-pakña, enemies. In
this way, the differences between the groups churn the nectarean ocean of rasa.”

Vijaya, “Kindly explain the details of sva-pakña, one’s own; suhåt-pakña,
friends; taöasthä-pakña, neutrals; and prati-pakña, enemies.”

Gosvämé, “I have already described svapakña, one’s own group, in some detail.
Suhåt-pakña sakhés are of two kinds: iñöä-sädhikä, friends pushed together to do
something favorable for their own yüthas; and aniñöa-sädhikä, friends pushed
together to do something mischievous for the detriment of a rival yütha. The
taöasthä-pakña, neutrals, are those gopés who are friendly to both sva-pakña,
one’s own party, and the prati-pakña, enemy party.” 

Vijaya, “Please describe the prati-pakñas, enemies.”

Gosvämé, “Those who subvert and foil the welfare of another yütha for the
interest of their own yütha are prati-pakñas or vipakñas. They attempt to foil
the goal of the other yütha and in the process bring anguish upon that yütha,
and because of their inimical feelings for the opposing yütha, they are
pratipakña or vipakña-sakhés. The vipakña-sakhés gradually manifest: chadma,
deceit; érñä, jealousy and grudges; cäpalya, restlessness; asüyä, fault-finding;
mätsarya, envy; amarña, intolerance; garva, conceit; and other such bhävas,
towards their particular vipakña-sakhés, enemy camp.”

Vijaya, “How is garva exhibited?”

Gosvämé, “Garva, pride, is expressed in six ways: ahaìkära, egotism; abhimäna,
self-assertion; darpa, smugness; uddhasita, insolence; mada, conceit; and
auddhatya, haughtiness.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, in this context, what is ahaìkära?” 

Gosvämé, “When svapakña, one’s own group, is praised, and the pratipakña, rival
group, is reviled, this attitude is called ahaìkära, egotism.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, what is abhimäna in this situation?” 

Gosvämé, “To assert the wonderful excellence in prema of svapakña, one’s own
group, with emotions and posturing, is called abhimäna, ostentatious
self-assertion.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, what is darpa, here?” 

Gosvämé, “Darpa indicates the smugness that the svapakña-sakhés feel from the
conviction that they have superior admission into the pastimes of Rädhä-Kåñëa.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, what is uddhasita?” 

Gosvämé, “The direct retorts and derisive jokes hurled at the pratipakña-sakhés
are called uddhasita, insolence.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, what is mada?” 

Gosvämé, “In this context, mada indicates the feeling of inner pride and
superiority that impels one to accomplish one’s devotional service more
expertly.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, what is auddhatya?” 

Gosvämé, “Auddhatya, haughtiness, is the tauntingly unabashed declaration of the
superiority of one’s svapakña, own group, in everything. Similarly, the openly
cryptic and critical deprecation of others is auddhatya.” 

Vijaya, “Do the yütheçvarés also directly express jealousy?”

Gosvämé, “No, on account of the gravity of their senior positions the
yütheçvarés never openly or directly articulate feelings of jealousy towards the
vipakñas. In fact, even the sharp-tongued prakharä-sakhés, who are by nature
quick to chastise, will rarely speak loosely in the presence of the
vipakña-yütheçvarés.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, the yütheçvarés in vraja-lélä are all nitya-siddha-çaktis of
the Supreme Lord. What is the purpose of their emotions of jealous enmity
between one another? Observing all these dealings, mundane empiricists and
rhetoricians show scorn for the absolute, esoteric sublimity of vraja-lélä.
Their argument is that if such jealous enmity is present in the parama-tattva,
Supreme Transcendental Principle, then why should the similar worldly activities
of this material plane be despised and renounced.

“Prabhu, we reside in Çré Navadvépa-dhäma, which is by the desire of Çré Kåñëa
Caitanya infested with a variety of materialistic non-devotees. There are the
smärta-brähmaëas, followers of karma-käëòa; the logicians; the empiricists; and
uncountable blasphemers. They all try to find fault and criticize the wonderful
supramundane vraja-lélä of Çré Rädhä and Çré Kåñëa, propounding the lélä as
mundane and illusory, a product of mäyä. Kindly enlighten us in this arcane
knowledge so that our dedication to rasa-tattva becomes firmer and unshaken in
the face of such remarks.”

Gosvämé, “Only those who are completely devoid of any relish of transcendental
rasa object to such spiritual sentiments of hostility that are present in the
hearts of the confidential and beloved associates of the Supreme Lord, Çré
Kåñëa. To fathom this recondite knowledge, one should understand that in Vraja,
Kåñëa, the slayer of Aghäsura and beguiler of millions of Kämadevas, has the
embodiment of çåìgära-rasa as His priya-narma-sakhä, dear friend. This
priya-narma-sakhä, the embodiment of çåìgära-rasa, arranges contrary spiritual
emotions, such as érñä, jealousy, in the hearts of the different pakñas, groups,
simply to further enhance the transcendental rasa and thus satisfy Kåñëa.
However, such opposing bhävas are actually transformations of sneha for Kåñëa
and only expressed at the times of the union with Kåñëa. When they are separated
from Kåñëa, the opposing groups feel deep affection for each other.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, we are unfortunate conditioned souls; hence, these arcane
topics are not easy to comprehend. Graciously, kindly elaborate explicitly upon
this mystical truth.” 

Gosvämé, “Prema-rasa is a vast ocean of milk. If contentious argumentation, akin
to acidic cow urine, is poured into this milk ocean, the milk curdles. It is not
advisable to use logic and rationality to delve deeply into the ocean of this
most esoteric truth. Only those sincere sädhakas who are favoured by Bhakti devé
because of immeasurable bhakti-sukåti will have their hearts enlightened with
the beacon of cit-hlädiné-çakti and be able to comprehend this siddhänta without
the use of mundane logic. 

“On the other hand, those who try to grapple with this subject using logic and
rationality will find that the inconceivable pure siddhänta remains latent and
hidden. The resort to kutarka, false logic and argument, only uselessly provokes
further kutarka. However, you are a very fortunate soul, being a recipient of
the blessings of Bhakti devé and so the esoteric essence has already been
revealed to you. Since you are questioning me out of keenness to fortify
yourself further in siddhänta, then I will try to reiterate and expand upon this
matter. You are neither an argumentative rhetorician, nor a karma-käëòé
smärta-brähmaëa, nor an empiric philosopher, nor an agnostic, nor a neophyte
devotee on the level of vaidhé-bhakti; therefore, I have no reservations about
speaking to you upon any siddhänta.

“There are two types of inquisitive persons. The first type enquires on the
basis of dry logic and rationality; whereas, the other type has faith in the
principles of bhakti and enquires submissively in order to deepen his
understanding of the eternally perfect and infallible truths. One should avoid
answering the questions set by logicians and rationalists because they will
never believe in genuine descriptions of the transcendental truth. Their
reasoning and arguments are all mundane speculations within the realm of mäyä,
and therefore these speculators have no access into the transcendental realm of
acintya-bhäva, inconceivable spiritual emotion. Indefatigable juggling of ideas
and speculations can never bring them to spiritual perception of the
acintya-tattva, inconceivable precepts. Ultimately, the path of mental
speculation leads them to the quagmire of atheism, having destroyed any glimpse
of faith in an Éçvara.

“According to adhikära there are numerous divisions amongst the bhakti-pakña,
party of devotional enquirers. Even if they have attained a sad-guru, only those
bhaktas who have the adhikära for çåìgära-rasa can fully grasp this confidential
tattva. The transcendental sentiments and emotions of the rasas of
våndävana-lélä are superexcellent. Superficially, çåìgära rasa may appear like
the mundane amorous sentiments of the material world, but actually çåìgära rasa
is completely opposite in quality. The Çrémad Bhägavatam, 10.33.39, states that
anyone who hears the rasa-lélä pastimes will cure the material disease of his
heart, which is the cause of his material bondage.

“What is the heart disease of the conditioned soul? The disease is mundane lust.
A matrix of endless mundane lust arises in those conditioned jévas who
misidentify themselves with the gross material body of the seven dhätus—flesh,
bone, blood, etc—be it of male or female gender, and who take shelter of the
three subtle elements—mind, intelligence, false ego—comprising the subtle
material body. However, this matrix may be easily extirpated by immersion in
hearing the all-purifying vraja-lélä of the Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa. In fact,
nothing else contains the potency to do so. The astounding siddhänta is that the
çåìgära-rasa of våndävana-lélä is so wonderful that by faithfully hearing about
it mundane lust, so contemptible, is purified and transformed. Furthermore, the
nirviçeña-brahma concept of the featureless Supreme that so absorbs the minds of
the impersonalistic ätmärämas is blown away like a dry leaf in a storm by the
apräkåta-çåìgära-rasa, who is then regally and eternally enthroned on the throne
abdicated by the impersonal concept. Moreover, çåìgära-rasa shines eternally in
the brilliance of its own glory, subduing the radiance of vaikuëöha
aiçvarya-rasa in the paravyoma.

“Çåìgära-rasa is the rasa par excellence that bestows sändränanda, highly
condensed bliss—absent are the two forms of unsatisfactory happiness:
çuñkänanda, the dry pleasure of impersonal realization; and jaòänanda, the
pleasure derived from inert matter. In çåìgära-rasa, the pleasure is not
saëkucitänanda, limited bliss, but is pürëänanda, fully blossomed,
ever-expanding nectarean bliss. By way of producing this unlimited ocean of
bliss, çåìgära-rasa artfully shelters within herself the unlimited variety of
bhävas that often manifest themselves as vijätéya-bhävä, contrary moods. In this
way the rasas are augmented and find full expression. According to the
circumstances, these vijätéya-bhävas are sometimes snehätmaka, affectionate, or
sometimes filled with dveñätmaka, jealousy and enmity. 

“However, the transcendental vijätéya-bhävas of apräkåta-rasa are by their
nature diametrically opposed to their base and defective counterparts in the
material world. They are variegated transformations of paramänanda, supreme
bliss. They are like the sun that heats the water, thus swelling and expanding
the nectarean ocean of rasa. 

“According to Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, bhäva is wonderfully variegated. Those bhävas
that are of completely compatible textures are svapakña, of the same group. When
there are only slight differences in bhäva texture, the bhävas are called
suhåt-pakña, of a friendly group. When the differences in bhäva texture are more
pronounced, those bhävas are taöastha, relatively neutral. And when the bhäva
textures are mutually opposing, relatively having a totally alien hue, they are
called vipakña, of the enemy group. In this last circumstance when the bhävas
are vijätéya, then the paramänanda-rasa, supreme ocean of blissful mellows,
produces feelings of jealousy, enmity, etc.” 

Vijaya, “Yet, why does this polarisation of pakña, friends, and vipakña,
enemies, exist?”

Gosvämé, “When two näyikäs express their particular bhävas with equal fervour,
this rivalry causes the bhävas of pakña and vipakña to appear. Thus, one can see
that the resultant camaraderie and belligerency are both inflections of rasa and
that too solely for the purpose of enriching and sweetening the uninterrupted
flow of çåìgära-rasa.”

Vijaya, “Are the two çaktis, Çrématé Rädhikä and Çré Candrävalé, equal in
tattva?”

Gosvämé, “No, certainly not! Çrématé Rädhikä is mahäbhäva-mayi, the very form of
mahäbhäva, the paramount spectrum of bhävas, and is thus the essence of the
hlädiné-çakti. Çré Candrävalé is Çrématé Rädhikä’s käya-vyüha, bodily expansion,
and of infinitely less qualification and potency. Notwithstanding, Çré
Candrävalé has been assigned a status of apparent equality and rivalry with
Çrématé Rädhikä solely to nurture the prema-lélä of çåìgära-rasa. 

“Furthermore, consider that it is not possible that two yütheçvarés should
possess svajätéya-bhäva, completely similar textures of emotion and nature. On
the rare occasions when similarities do surface, there is only a touch of
similarity and this also happens by coincidence, just like the path eaten by a
bookworm in the page of a book may sometimes resemble the shape of a letter.
Actually, considering the great variety of nature amongst the yütheçvarés, it is
only natural that the svapakña and vipakña bhävas of prema-rasa are
spontaneously produced.” 

Vijaya, “Çréla Gurudeva, my apprehensions have finally been allayed. Your
nectarean instructions have entered my heart and terminated the bitterness of
ignorance and doubt. I have now a comprehensive understanding of älambana, the
object and shelter of prema-rasa, in regard to the vibhäva, basic impetus, of
mädhurya-rasa.

“Sac-cid-änanda Kåñëa, the icon of eternity, absolute knowledge and bliss, is
the sole näyaka, manifesting a variety of characteristics that are broadly
headed under the personalities of dhérodätta, dhéra-lalita, dhéra-çänta, and
dhéroddhata. As the näyaka, He enjoys the roles of pati and upapati, thus
eternally churning up rasa with His prema-lélä. In these roles, He manifests the
attitudes of anuküla, faithfulness; dakñiëa, sincerity; çaöha, deceitfulness;
and dhåñöa, bold precociousness. He is always served by His dear friends in
their roles as ceöa, messengers; viöa, personal attendants; vidüñaka, humorists;
péöha-mardda, constant companions; and priya-narma-sakhäs, most intimate
friends. Kåñëa, so fond of playing upon His divine vaàçé has today appeared in
my heart, as the singular viñaya of mädhurya-rasa.

“Simultaneously, I have realized that the äçraya of mädhurya-rasa are the
vraja-sundarés, who play the role of näyikäs. Näyikäs are of two kinds: svakéya
and parakéya. In Vraja, the pärakiya-näyikäs are the äçraya of çåìgära-rasa and
are of three varieties: sädhana-para, devé, and nitya-priya. These exquisite
vraja-sundarés have distributed themselves over numerous yüthas, in order to
serve Kåñëa. In this way, millions of lovely vraja-gopés are guided by
innumerable yütheçvarés, amongst whom Çré Rädhä and Çré Candrävalé are the most
prominent. The yütha of Çrématé Rädhikä features five types of sakhés: sakhé,
nitya-sakhé, präëa sakhé, priya-sakhé, and parama-çreñöha-sakhé. 

“The parama-çreñöha-sakhés—such as Lalitä, Viçäkhä, etc—are also known as the
añöa-sakhés. Although they are qualified to become yütheçvarés, the yearning to
always remain the followers of Çrématé Rädhikä precludes these añöa-sakhés from
leading their own separate yüthas. However, the sakhés who like to emulate their
particular mood of service are known as their gaëa; for instance, there is the
lalitä-gaëa, the viçäkhä-gaëa, etc. 

“Näyikäs are of three types: mugdhä, madhya, and pragalbhä. Of these three, the
madhya and pragalbhä are both subdivided into a further three categories: dhéra,
adhéra, and dhérädhéra. Therefore, one mugdhä, plus three madhya, plus three
pragalbhä makes seven categories. These seven categories are then further
subdivided into the two types—svakéya and parakéya—to make fourteen types. When
the separate category of kanyä-näyikä, is added to these fourteen, then a total
of fifteen categories of näyikäs is achieved. These fifteen categories of
näyikäs are then found in the eight avasthä, circumstances—beginning with
abhisärikä and so on—which when multiplied together—fifteen times eight—makes a
total of one hundred and twenty categories of näyikäs. However, these one
hundred and twenty näyikäs are further graded according to the three levels of
qualification—uttama, madhyama, and kaniñöha—and so we arrive at a grand total
of three hundred and twenty näyikäs. 

“Within my enraptured heart has awakened the understanding of the vyavahära,
dealings, of the yütheçvaré—such as their suhrd-vyavahära, warm and affable
demeanours—and their tätparya, purposes in service. I have also grasped the
different services of the sakhés and dütés. All this most esoteric knowledge has
opened the doors of my perception and I now understand the position of the gopés
who are the äçraya-tattva of rasa. When I combine this understanding with the
details of the viñaya-tattva of rasa, Çré Kåñëa, I realize the fundamental
älambana-tattva, which finds expression as an ingredient of vibhäva. Tomorrow, I
shall return to my place here at your lotus feet to learn about uddépana, which
is the other division of vibhäva, the basis for tasting kåñëa-prema. The Supreme
Lord Çré Kåñëa has been truly merciful to lead me to a sad-guru of your sublime
calibre. Your nectarean words are my only sustenance.” 

Çré Gopäla-guru Gosvämé affectionately put his arms around Vijaya and said, “My
son, I am forever grateful to Kåñëa for sending me such a worthy disciple as
you. Çréla Nimänanda, Çré Caitanya, is prompting me from within with all the
right answers in concert with the esoteric questions that you ask.”

It was a touching scene. The overwhelmed and grateful disciple and the satisfied
and humble sad-guru were exchanging words of deeply felt spiritual affection.
The residents of the Çré Rädhäkänta temple were enraptured; Çré Dhyänacandra in
particular was extremely pleased to see the abundant shower of divine grace upon
Vijaya. At that moment, some exalted devotees entered the temple and began to
sing a song composed by the great Vaiñëava poet, Caëòédäsa: 

sai (sakhé), kebä sunäila çyäma-näma (chorus)

“Oh my dear sakhé! Who has made me hear the name, Çyäma?” 

känera bhitara diyä, marame paçila go, 
äkula karila mora präëa

“Entering through my ears and playing within my heart, it has overwhelmed my
patience and made me feel so capricious.”

japite, japite näma, avaça karila go, 
kemone päibo sai, täre

“I do not know how much sweet nectar springs from this name, Çyäma, for even
just one moment my tongue can’t be restrained from such relish.”

japite, japite näma, avaça karila go, 
kemone päibo sai, täre

“As I constantly chant the name, Çyäma, I am overcome by love, Oh my dear sakhé!
How may I meet Him?”

näma-paratape jära, aichana karila go, 
aìgera paraçe kibä haya

“If I am so conquered by just His name, then by the merest touch of His body
what will become of me?”

yekhäne vasati tära, sekhäne thäkhiya go,
yuvaté dharama kaiche raya

“Should my eyes dwell upon Him for just a moment, then how shall I keep my vows
of chastity?”

päçarite kari mane, päçarä na jäya go,
ki käribe ki habe upäya

“Long have I struggled to push Him far away from my thoughts, but alas I am held
captive! What should I do?” 

kahe dvija-caëòédäsa, kulavaté kula-näse,
apanära yauvana jäcäya

“Dvija Caëòédäsa humbly says, ‘Oh Çyäma, this beautiful girl, who so respects
the honour of her family, has yet sacrificed herself upon the altar of Your
ever-fresh, blossoming youthfulness.”

Accompanied by the mådaìga and karatälas, the kértana continued for an hour and
a half, drowning everyone in waves of ecstasy. After being so absorbed, Vijaya
offered his respects to all the Vaiñëavas, then his prostrated obeisances to the
lotus feet of his guru, Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé, and left for his quarters in
Haracaëòi Sähi.

Thus ends the thirty-fourth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Mädhurya-rasa,
Part Four

JDH 35: Mädhurya-rasa, Part Five

Chapter Thirty-five
Mädhurya-rasa, Part Five

The intimate and intricate details of älambana-tattva, the foundation of
kåñëa-prema, now kept the mind of Vijaya constantly preoccupied. His heart
desired nothing else, and there was a growing disinterest in all material
dealings. Today, Vijaya quickly ate some simple, readily available prasädam, and
then hastened enmaddened to the Rädhäkänta temple, where he offered prostrated
obeisances to the lotus feet of Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé. Lifting him up
affectionately, Çréla Gosvämé embraced him and made him sit down close by. 

Without wasting a word, Vijaya enquired submissively, “Prabhu, I am yearning to
learn about the different uddépanas of mädhurya rasa. Kindly teach me.”

Gosvämé, “The uddépanas in mädhurya-rasa are guëa, the personal qualities; näma,
the names; carita, the activities; maëòana, the decorations; and the items
sambandhi, directly, and taöastha, indirectly, related to Çré Kåñëa, Çré Rädhä,
and the beloved gopés.”

Vijaya, “Of what type are the guëas?”

Gosvämé, “In mädhurya-rasa uddépana, the guëas are of three kinds: mänasika, of
the mind; väcika, of speech; and käyika, physical attributes.” 

Vijaya, “What are the mänasika-guëas?” 

Gosvämé, “The mänasika-guëas are many, for instance, gratitude, compassion,
forgiveness, kindness, and the like.” 

Vijaya, “What are the väcika-guëas?” 

Gosvämé, “The väcika-guëas are sweet and pleasing words that delight the ears.” 

Vijaya, “Prabhu, please enumerate the käyika-guëas.” 

Gosvämé, “The käyika-guëas are numerous, prominent amongst them are vayasä, the
age, of yauvana, fresh youthfulness; rüpa, splendorous and lustrous beauty;
lävaëya, charming loveliness; saundarya, beautiful figure and posture;
abhi-rüpatä, the ability to enhance the beauty of others; mädhurya, sweetness;
and märdava, mildness, gentility, and sensitivity. As just mentioned, one of the
käyika guëas is yauvana, fresh youthfulness, which in mädhurya-rasa is of four
kinds: vayaù-sandhi, transition to adolescence; navya-vayasä, new adolescence;
vyakta-vayasä, blooming adolescence; and pürëa-vayasä, the prime of
youthfulness.” 

Vijaya, “What is vayaù-sandhi?”

Gosvämé, “The transition period between bälya, childhood and yauvana, youth, is
called vayaù-sandhi; it is also called prathama-kaiçora. The prior ages are
bälya, childhood, the age from one to five years, which leads to paugaëòa, six
to ten years. The sweet charm of the awakening adolescence of Kåñëa and His
beloved girlfriends in vayaù-sandhi is the uddépana causing the first stirrings
of mädhurya-rasa between Kåñëa and the gopés.”

Vijaya, “Kindly elucidate navya-vayasä?”

Gosvämé, “Navya-vayasä is the very beginning of yauvana, when one actually
enters into youth-hood. In the gopés, there is the rising of the breasts,
amorous restlessness in the glances of the eyes, a hint of a dancing smile upon
the face and lips, emotional agitation of the heart, and a little
unmindfulness.”

Vijaya, “How is vyakta-vayasä?”

At this point in the discourse, a Vaiñëava belonging to the Çré-sampradäya and a
sannyäsé scholar of the Çaìkara school came into the temple and offered
obeisances to the Deities. A Çré Vaiñëava generally considers himself as a male
servitor of the Lord, whereas a Çaìkara sannyäsé has plunged into the dry
meditation of the nirviçeña-brahma. Therefore, neither of these visitors was
attracted to the spiritual identity and sentiment of the vraja-gopés. Discussing
details of mädhurya-rasa in the presence of those who are attached to male
identities is taboo, so Çréla Gosvämé and Vijaya quickly curtailed their
confidential discussion and changed to an appropriate topic of philosophical
conversation before the visitors. After a short while, the two pilgrims left for
the siddha-bakula tree of Çréla Haridäsa Öhäkura. Smiling slightly, Vijaya
repeated his question to Çréla Gosvämé. 

Gosvämé, “The symptoms of vyakta-vayasä, blossoming youth, upon the gopés are
highly-raised blooming breasts, three beautiful lines across the abdomen, and
the whole body shining with the lustre and radiance of youth.”

Vijaya, “Kindly explain pürëa-vayasä?”

Gosvämé, “In pürëa-vayasä, full youthfulness, the hips are large, the waistline
becomes slender, the body possesses a lustrous, radiant complexion of
extraordinary beauty, and the breasts are large, heavy and shapely and appear to
overburden the thighs that resemble the stems of banana trees. Some
vraja-sundarés, even though in a stage of earlier youth, appear to be in
pürëa-yauvana, the prime of youth, because of their early maturity and overall
physical exquisiteness.”

Vijaya, “By your grace, I have understood the different vayasäs, ages. Now
kindly explain rüpa.”

Gosvämé, “When a young girl looks lustrous and beautiful even without make-up
and jewellery, she is said to possess rüpa, extraordinary beauty. In addition,
her exquisite bodily features are perfectly proportioned.” 

Vijaya, “What is lävaëya, charming loveliness?”

Gosvämé, “Lävaëya is best described by the effulgence that glows from within a
pearl—such is the charm and radiance of her bodily complexion and inner
attractiveness.” 

Vijaya, “What is saundarya, beauty of form?”

Gosvämé, “In saundarya, all the limbs of the body are delicate, graceful,
beautifully shaped, and in ideal proportion to one another in a most charming
way.”

Vijaya, “What is abhi-rüpatä, to enhance the beauty of others?”

Gosvämé, “Abhi-rüpatä is the potency by one’s own wonderful qualities to
increase the attractiveness of others nearby, appearing to lend one’s beauty,
even causing others to resemble oneself in beautiful bodily features.” 

Vijaya, “What is mädhurya, sweetness?”

Gosvämé, “Mädhurya is when the sweet charm and unlimited beauty of the body is
inexplicably and indescribably exquisite.”

Vijaya, “What is märdava, gentleness and sensitivity?”

Gosvämé, “Märdava is when the body manifests gentleness and sensitivity to even
the most delicate contact. It is of three levels: kaniñöha, lesser; madhyama,
intermediate; and uttama, highest.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I have understood the meanings of the different guëas, kindly
now elucidate the other uddépanas, starting with näma.” 

Gosvämé, “The many names of Çré Rädhä and Çré Kåñëa, which are saturated with
sublime transcendental bhäva and rasa are called näma.” 

Vijaya, “What is carita?”

Gosvämé, “Carita, character and inner nature, manifests in two ways: lélä,
transcendental pastimes; and anubhäva, subordinate, consequent ecstasy. After
the full realization of the lélä, then anubhäva can be attained. Previously, we
have elucidated anubhäva after describing vibhäva.” 

Vijaya, “What are the léläs?”

Gosvämé, “The léläs are the eternal, ever-fresh, and unlimited pastimes and
sports of Çré Kåñëa in the company of His beloved devotees. Some of the léläs
are caru-kåda, sweet nectarean playfulness; nåtya, dancing; veëu-vedanä, flute
playing; go-dohana, milking the cows; calling and counting the cows atop
Govardhana Hill; and herding the cows from place to place.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly describe the caru-kåda léläs in more detail.”

Gosvämé, “The caru-kåda léläs include the famous and captivating räsa-lélä
dance, hide and seek games within the Våndävana forests, and kanduka-kåda,
playing with a ball. These charming pastimes are unlimited and most beautiful.” 

Vijaya, “What are the maëòana, decorations?”

Gosvämé, “Maëòana is of four types: vastra, clothing; bhüñaëa, jewellery; mälya,
garlands; and anulepana, oils, ointments, and paste—anything smeared upon the
body.”

Vijaya, “Now I have understood those. Please continue with sambandhi, connected
items.”

Gosvämé, “Sambandhi is of two varieties: lagna or saàyuktä, direct conjunction;
and sannihita, close association.” 

Vijaya, “What are the lagna-sambandhi?”

Gosvämé, “The sounds of the vaàçé, flute, çåìga, horn, and singing; plus the
fragrance of perfumes; the tinkling of jewelleries; foot impressions upon the
sand; the vibration of a véëä; artistic dress; and so on are all
lagna-sambandhi, directly conjoined with Kåñëa.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly expand upon Kåñëa’s nectarean flute playing.”

Gosvämé, “Of all the lagnas, the mysteriously sweet and all-attractive melodies
that manifest as Kåñëa puts His lips to the muralé are the most enchanting and
powerful of all the uddépanas that evoke mädhurya-rasa.”

Vijaya, “What are the sannihita-sambandhi, items that are closely associated?”

Gosvämé, “The list of sannihita-sambandhi is endless, some prominent ones are
flowers and garlands that once adorned the Divine Couple; peacock feathers; the
dust of Våndävana; rocks or other items from Çré Govardhana; the cows and
calves; the cowherder’s cane, flute and horn; someone dear to Kåñëa; dust-clouds
raised by homeward-bound herds of cows just before sunset; Çré Våndävana-dhäma;
våndävanäçritä, the residents and living entities who are sheltered in
Våndävana-dhäma; Çré Govardhana Hill; the River Yämuna; the site of the
räsa-lélä dance, and so on.”

Vijaya, “What is meant by våndävanäçritä, the living entities and residents
sheltered in Våndävana-dhäma?”

Gosvämé, “This uddépana indicates all the residents and living entities of
Våndävana-dhäma which includes the birds, such as the peacock; the bumble bees;
the deer; the verdant bowers and groves; the creepers and trees; the tulasé
plant; the kamikä, laburnum flowers; the kadamba tree and flowers; and many
other such items all of which are so typical of Çré Våndävana-dhäma.”

Vijaya, “What are the taöasthä-uddépana, stimuli of a neutral nature?”

Gosvämé, “Some of the prominent items of this category of uddépana are the
moonlight, the clouds and lightning, the spring and autumn seasons, the full
moon, the wind, the sky, and the pleasant air and atmosphere.”

Hearing these nectarean elucidations, Vijaya fell into a thoughtful silence, as
he pondered the uddépanas of mädhurya-rasa. Çréla Gosvämé was satisfied to
observe that Vijaya was absorbing this most esoteric knowledge very well. Then,
starting from within his heart, Vijaya felt an inexplicable current of exalted
bhäva envelop his consciousness as uddépana-bhäva mingled with älambana.
Anubhävas began to appear upon the person of Vijaya; his body erupted with
horripilation, and in a choked voice he asked, “Prabhu, kindly shower me with
your mercy. Explain the anubhävas to me in detail so that my understanding of
the characteristics and activities of Kåñëa that you have already partially
revealed in the discussion of His lélä is more complete.”

Gosvämé, “Anubhävas are of three kinds: alaìkära; ornamental moods; udbhäsvara,
bodily; and väcika, verbal.” 

Vijaya, “What are the alaìkära, moods that ornament?”

Gosvämé, “Alaìkära is of twenty moods, which are manifestations of the inner
feelings of the gopés of Vraja when they are still in yauvana, the prime of
youth. These alaìkäras are grouped under three headings: aìgaja, manifested by
the body; ayatnaja, manifested spontaneously by the self; and svabhävaja,
manifested by one’s nature. 

 “The three aìgaja are (1) bhäva, seeds of ecstasy; (2) häva, gestures; and (3)
helä, amorous dalliance. The seven ayatnaja are (4) çobhä, beauty; (5) känti,
lustre; (6) dépti, brilliance; (7) mädhurya, sweetness; (8) pragalbhatä,
impudence; (9) audärya, magnanimity; and (10) dhairya, stability and patience.
The ten svabhävaja are (11) imitating lélä, pastimes; (12) viläsa, enjoyment;
(13) vicchitti, breaking off; (14) vibhrama, puzzlement; (15) kila-kiïcita, a
particular range of ecstasies manifested upon seeing Kåñëa; (16) moööäyita,
awakening of amorous desires by remembrance; (17) kuötämita, externally contrary
and angry, but happy within; (18) vivvoka, in anger neglecting the entreaties of
the näyaka; (19) lalita, charming posture and movement of the eyes; and (20)
vikåta, to express feelings through actions rather than words.”

Vijaya, “In this context what is meant by bhäva?”

Gosvämé, “Bhäva here indicates the initial transformation of transcendental
emotion as the purified citta comes under siege through the ujjvala-rasa,
conjugal mellow, of rati. The pristine state of the heart that is immersed in
rati is called sattva, and when cause for ecstatic transformation arises the
first stirrings of emotion are compared to an awakening seed and are referred to
as bhäva.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, please kindly explain häva, gestures.”

Gosvämé, “On account of the slight budding of bhäva, the symptoms of häva arise:
the neck is tilted coyly, the eyes dilate and dance, and the eyebrows arch
beautifully and rise upwards.” 

Vijaya, “Prabhu, what is helä, passion.”

Gosvämé, “When the emotion indicated by häva expands turbulently and explicitly
indicates amorous passionate desire, it is called helä.’’ 

Vijaya, “What is çobhä, beauty?”

Gosvämé, “Through engagement in amorous pastimes, çobhä—beauty, youthfulness,
and desire for pleasure—exude from and further beautify the subtle
embellishments of the body.” 

Vijaya, “What is känti, lustre?”

Gosvämé, “When the passions of erotic love are satisfied and the gopé feels
great transcendental bliss to have pleased Kåñëa, the radiant beauty of
fulfilment is called känti.” 

Vijaya, “What is dépti, brilliantly shining?”

Gosvämé, “When the gopé in her vayasä, age of blossoming youth, with the mood of
bhoga, the desire for amorous enjoyment, offers herself to Kåñëa at the
appropriate deça, place, and käla, time, then her guëa, qualities, stoke känti
to even greater brilliance and wide-spread efflorescence, then this is called
dépti, brilliantly shining.” 

Vijaya, “What is mädhurya in this context?”

Gosvämé, “Here mädhurya indicates the delicate grace and exquisite dexterity
that is maintained by the gopés under all circumstances as they execute all
endeavours for Kåñëa’s happiness.” 

Vijaya, “What is pragalbhatä, boldness?”

Gosvämé, “Boldness and firm resolution in making romantic overtures is called
pragalbhatä. The lover, distressed by amorous desire, is directly intrepid in
making physical contact with her lover.” 

Vijaya, “What is audärya, magnanimity?”

Gosvämé, “When the most qualified and attractive gopé is modest, courteous and
self-controlled under all conditions, it is known as audärya, magnanimity.”

Vijaya, “What is dhairya, steadiness?”

Gosvämé, “When highest sentiments of amorous love are maintained without
interruption and perturbation, the heart possesses dhairya, stability of
emotion.”

Vijaya, “In this context what is lélä?”

Gosvämé, “Prompted by love, when the lover playfully imitates the beloved’s
manner of dressing and acting, this is known as lélä.”

Vijaya, “What is viläsa, enjoyment?”

Gosvämé, “When the gopé, wishing to let the desire of her heart for union be
known to Kåñëa, suggests through movements of her body, hips, smiling lips and
dancing eyes, while sitting or walking, this is called viläsa, indicating the
desire for amorous enjoyment.”

Vijaya, “What is vicchitti?”

Gosvämé, “If even with sparse decoration and dress känti is produced to attract
Kåñëa, then this is called vicchitti. Secondly, however, according to some
authorities on the subject of rasa, vicchitti is the mixing of the emotions of
jealousy and apathy towards the beloved. When the näyaka is guilty of being
unfaithful, then the näyikä meets Him again at a meeting skilfully arranged by
her sakhés. However, in a mood of rejection towards her lover, the näyikä
expresses her anger to Him saying that she has dressed up in vain only upon the
insistence of her sakhés and that her dress and ornamentation is a superfluous
burden. In this second way of understanding, this jealous and neglectful mood is
known as vicchitti, breaking off.”

Vijaya, “What is vibhrama, puzzlement?”

Gosvämé, “If the beguiled lover prepares to meet her beloved and on account of
madana, extreme eagerness, she unknowingly wears her clothes, jewelleries and
flowers in the wrong places, then this is known as vibhrama.” 

Vijaya, “What is kila-kiïcita?”

Gosvämé, “Manifested at the time of meeting Kåñëa, the ecstatic emotion of
kila-kiïcita displays seven ecstatic ornaments, the root of which is joyous
elation. In kila-kiïcita, the näyikä, in jubilation, exhibits a tendency to
shrink away from the näyaka, all the while turbulently displaying: pride,
amorous yearning, smiling, feigned weeping, intolerance, fear and anger.”

Vijaya, “What is moööäyita?”

Gosvämé, “By remembering or receiving news of the näyaka, the awaiting näyikä
feels loving emotion that quickly transforms into amorous desire. This is
moööäyita, the awakening of amorous desires by remembrance.” 

Vijaya, “What is kuötämita?”

Gosvämé, “In intimate physical contact, during kissing or while He massages her
breasts, although the näyikä exults in her heart with ecstatic love upon giving
the beloved pleasure, externally she exhibits anger as if in pain, because of
modesty and shyness. This is called kuötämita.” 

Vijaya, “What is vivvoka?”

Gosvämé, “An unsympathetic attitude shown by the näyikä towards the näyaka,
brought about by His undesirable behaviour towards her, such as tardiness or
insensitivity, is called vivvoka.” 

Vijaya, “What is lalita?”

Gosvämé, “The subtle charm created by graceful movements of her limbs and the
dancing play of her eyebrows by the näyikä to express the poignancy of amorous
love, which lends great beauty to her youthfulness, is called lalita.”

Vijaya, “What is vikåta?”

Gosvämé, “Vikåta is when the näyikä tries to express feelings stemming from
shyness, hurt, jealousy, anger, and the like through actions—such as moving to
and fro—rather than through words.” 

“In short, these are the twenty alaìkäras, feminine moods, expressed by the
young vraja-gopés. However, according to the spiritual authorities, besides
these twenty emotions there are two more: maugdhya, pretence of unknowing; and
cakita, pretence of fear.”

Vijaya, “What is maugdhya?”

Gosvämé, “When the näyikä questions the näyaka about matters of which she is
actually fully aware whilst skilfully feigning ignorance of the very same
matters, this is maugdhya, feigned unknowing.”

Vijaya, “What is cakita?”

Gosvämé, “When, by pretence, the näyikä apparently becomes extremely frightened
in her lover’s presence whilst really not feeling fear at all, this is known as
cakita, feigned fearfulness.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, by your grace, I have understood the different varieties of
anubhäva-alaìkära, the ornamental moods of ecstasy of the vraja-gopés, now
kindly teach me the anubhäva-udbhäsvara, symptoms of consequent ecstasy
manifested through the body.”

Gosvämé, “When the powerful amorous emotions stirring the heart become manifest
externally upon the body of the näyikä, even after an attempt to restrain them,
these ecstatic transformations are called udbhäsvara. Prominent examples in
mädhurya-rasa are the skirts and girdle loosen and fall away; the sari covering
the upper torso slips down; the braids of hair become unsettled and untie;
through restlessness, the body flexes and stretches; there is continuous
yawning; the nostrils become flared as though finding perfume; singing;
self-condemnation; and long sighs of yearning.”

Vijaya, “It would seem that all these symptoms of udbhäsvara could very well be
included within moööäyita and viläsa, thus facilitating our understanding.”

Gosvämé, “No, for in spite of their similarity, each the udbhäsvaras exemplifies
a particular and powerful amorous emotion; hence, they are classified
separately.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, now please explain the väcika-anubhäva, subordinate ecstatic
emotions manifest by words.”

Gosvämé, “Väcika-anubhäva is of twelve varieties: äläpa, witty sweet talk;
viläpa, words of lamentation; saàläpa, conversing intimately; praläpa, taking
inconsistently; anuläpa, repeating topics; apaläpa, reinterpreting one’s words;
sandeça, messages; atideça, identifying with another’s words; apadeça, second
meanings; upadeça, words of instruction; nirdeça, words of affirmation; and
vyapadeça, fraudulent words.”

Vijaya, “What is äläpa?”

Gosvämé, “Enriching speech with pleasing words of witty flattery is called
äläpa.” 

Vijaya, “What is viläpa?”

Gosvämé, “Words of lamentation sorrowfully expressed are viläpa.” 

Vijaya, “What is saàläpa?”

Gosvämé, “A conversation of pleasing intimacy between the näyaka and the näyikä
is saàläpa.” 

Vijaya, “What is praläpa?”

Gosvämé, “Useless, inconsistent and futile words spoken as though in delirium or
madness are known as praläpa.” 

Vijaya, “What is anuläpa?”

Gosvämé, “To repeat the same, perhaps adulatory, words many times is called
anuläpa.” 

Vijaya, “What is apaläpa?”

Gosvämé, “Cleverly explaining one’s previous speech in a different light is
apaläpa.” 

Vijaya, “What is sandeça?”

Gosvämé, “Sending a message expressing one’s love to the lover in a faraway
place is sandeça.” 

Vijaya, “What is atideça?”

Gosvämé, “To proudly assert such as, ‘His words are my words,’ is atideça.” 

Vijaya, “What is apadeça?”

Gosvämé, “Speaking in a roundabout manner instead of revealing one’s intention
directly is known as apadeça.”

Vijaya, “What is upadeça?”

Gosvämé, “Words of kind advice and instruction are called upadeça.” 

Vijaya, “What is nirdeça?”

Gosvämé, “To affirm and assert one’s identity, saying such as, ‘I am that
person,’ is nirdeça.”

Vijaya, “What is vyapadeça?”

Gosvämé, “Vyapadeça is to speak words that misrepresent one’s true inner
desire.” 

“These symptoms of anubhäva are found in all the primary rasas, however they are
seen to be especially prominent in churning the nectar of mädhurya-rasa, and
thus they should be clearly mentioned at this point.”

Vijaya, “Mahäräja, in the paradigm of rasa, why is anubhäva delineated as a
separate principle?”

Gosvämé, “The amalgamation of älambana, basic causes of divine love, with
uddépana, items that stimulate divine love, produces bhäva within the heart.
When this bhäva becomes manifest in the body, mind, and words, it is defined as
anubhäva. In order to present a clear picture of the subject, anubhäva has to be
described independently.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I am keen to hear about sattvika-bhäva in mädhurya-rasa.”

Gosvämé, “In a general discussion on the principles of rasa, spiritual mellows,
I have already mentioned the añöa-sattvika-bhäva, the eight symptomatic physical
transformations caused by ecstatic emotion, such as: sveda, profuse
perspiration; stambha, being stunned; etc. The same añöa-sattvika-bhäva are
present in mädhurya-rasa, though the causes of their expression are different
here.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly elucidate this difference.”

Gosvämé, “In vraja-lélä, we find that the añöa-sattvika-bhäva of stambha, being
stunned, is caused by harña, delight; bhaya, fear; äçcarya, wonder; viñäda,
grief; and amarña, indignation. 

“Sveda, profuse perspiration, is produced by haåsa, humorous joy; bhaya, fear;
and krodha, anger. 

“Romäïca, horripilation, comes from äçcarya, bewonderment; harña, happiness; and
bhaya, fearfulness. 

“Svarabhaìga, loss of voice, appears by viñäda, remorse; vismaya, astonishment;
amarña, indignation; and bhaya, fear. 

“Kampa, trembling, is caused by bhaya, fear; haåsa, joy; and amarña,
indignation. 

“Vaivarëya, pallor, is a result of viçada, lamentation; krodha, anger; and
bhaya, fear. 

“Açru, tearfulness, is aroused by haåsa, humour; amarña, indignation; and
viñäda, lamentation. 

“Pralaya, devastation and near-death, results from sukha, excessive pleasure;
and dukha, distress, sorrow.”

Vijaya, “Are these añöa-sattvika-bhävas manifested differently in
mädhurya-rasa?”

Gosvämé, “Yes. Previously, when I discussed rasa, transcendental mellow, in
general terms, I mentioned four stages that indicated the intensity of
expression of the añöa-sattvika-bhävas. The two stages of the devotee trying to
check the manifestation of the añöa-sattvika-bhävas were dhümäyitä, the smoking
stage; and jvalitä, the stage of being alight. The two further stages of
intensity were dépta, blazing; and uddépta, greatly inflamed. However, in
mädhurya-rasa, uddépta, greatly inflamed, has a further progression of intensity
known as süddépta, intensely inflamed.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, you are very kind to me; your answers are like soothing salve
upon my parched heart. Kindly explain the nature of the vyabhicäré-bhävas,
transitory ecstasies, which arise wave-like from the ocean of sthäyi-bhäva,
permanent ecstasy, in mädhurya-rasa.” 

Gosvämé, “Days earlier when speaking of rasa, I described to you the
thirty-three vyabhicäré-bhävas, which are also known as saïcäri-bhävas,
impelling ecstasies. They are such as nirveda, indifference; viñäda, sorrow; and
dainya, meekness. All of them exist in mädhurya-rasa except augrya, violence;
and älasya, indolence, laziness. However, there are some most wonderful special
features in the vyabhicäré bhävas of mädhurya-rasa.”

Vijaya, “What are those most special features?”

Gosvämé, “The sthäyi-bhävas of sakhya and vätsalya rasas—the kåñëa-prema of
Kåñëa’s friends and elders—is also present in mädhurya-rasa, but now acts as a
vyabhicäré or saïcäri-bhäva, transitory and impelling ecstasy. This is the first
amazing feature.” 

Vijaya, “What are the other wonderful features?”

Gosvämé, “The thirty-three vyabhicäré-bhäva symptoms are not seen as direct
aìgas, branches, of the main trunk of mädhurya-rasa. Even, the vyabhicäré
symptoms starting with the fifteenth, måti, death, and continuing to the
thirty-third are not seen as aìgas of this rasa. In mädhurya-rasa, they are
counted as guëas, attributes, of the rasa. Therefore, the conclusion is that
mädhurya-rasa is the guëé, principle object and possessor, of the vyabhicäré
symptoms, which are its guëas, attributes.”

Vijaya, “How do the vyabhicäré-bhävas arise?”

Gosvämé, “Nirveda, indifference, is born out of anxiety and suffering,
unpleasant argumentation, jealousy, melancholy, calamity, and offence.” 

Vijaya, “How does dainya arise?”

Gosvämé, “Dainya, meekness, humility, is caused by unhappiness, fear, and
offence.” 

Vijaya, “How does gläni arise?”

Gosvämé, “Gläni, languor, is caused by anxiety, fatigue after labour, and
amorous exertion.”

Vijaya, “How does çrama arise?”

Gosvämé, “Çrama, fatigue, comes from journey, dancing, and the activity of
love.” 

Vijaya, “How does mada arise?”

Gosvämé, “Mada, illusion, craziness, is a result of excessive ingestion of honey
and such intoxicants, which leads to a loss of rational perception.” 

Vijaya, “How does garva arise?”

Gosvämé, “Garva, pride, is caused by good fortune, beauty, personal excellences,
and obtaining the highest desired shelter, the object of one’s desire.” 

Vijaya, “How does çaìkä arise?”

Gosvämé, “Çaìkä, apprehension, is produced by stealing, offence, cruelty, and
threats from others.”

Vijaya, “How does träsa arise?”

Gosvämé, “Träsa, shock, arises from lightning, fearsome animals, or by terrible
sudden sounds.” 

Vijaya, “How does ävega arise?”

Gosvämé, “Ävega, intense trepidation resulting in indecision, is caused by
seeing and hearing the object of love or very pleasing things, or by seeing
unpleasant sights and hearing disturbing words and news. The heart and mind
become bemused by the upsurge of intense emotion.”

Vijaya, “How does unmäda arise?”

Gosvämé, “Unmäda, madness, may be caused by mahänanda, excessive bliss, or by
deeply distressing pangs of separation.” 

Vijaya, “How does apasmåti arise?”

Gosvämé, “Apasmåti, absent-mindedness, is the result of a broken heart deeply
singed by sorrow, making the afflicted person see all things with indifference.”


Vijaya, “How does vyädhi arise?”

Gosvämé, “Vyädhi, sickness, disease, is caused by extreme worry and anxiety,
which bring fever and malady.” 

Vijaya, “How does moha arise?”

Gosvämé, “Moha, bewilderment, occurs when the heart is stupefied by excessive
mirth, separation from the beloved, and grief.” 

Vijaya, “How does måtyu arise?”

Gosvämé, “Måtyu, death, is not present in mädhurya-rasa; only the desire, or
even preparation for måtyu are seen.” 

Vijaya, “How does älasya arise?”

Gosvämé, “Älasya, laziness, is absent as such in mädhurya-rasa. However, the
feeling of being weak and incapable although one is actually strong and capable
is called älasya in mädhurya-rasa. In the service of Kåñëa there is no idleness;
however, it may be seen in those of the non-devotional opposition camp.”

Vijaya, “How does jäòya, inertia, arise?”

Gosvämé, “Jäòya, being stunned causing invalidity, is present in mädhurya-rasa
and is evoked by seeing or hearing about one’s beloved, by seeing or hearing
something that is most undesirable, or by the pain of separation.” 

Vijaya, “How does vréòä, bashfulness, arise?”

Gosvämé, “Vréòä or lajjä, shame, shyness, embarrassment, may be experienced in
the first stages of a rendezvous with the beloved, or if one behaves
inappropriately, or if one is praised, disparaged, or ignored.” 

Vijaya, “How does avahitthä arise?”

Gosvämé, “Avahitthä, the concealment of emotions, is sparked by duplicity,
shyness, kindness, fear, and the effort to maintain one’s dignity.”

Vijaya, “How does småti arise?”

Gosvämé, “Småti, remembrance, arises through seeing persons or objects similar
to a previous emotional attachment, or by the cultivation of habit.” 

Vijaya, “How does vitarka arise?”

Gosvämé, “Vitarka, argumentation, comes from melancholy, doubt, and discontent.”


Vijaya, “How does cintä arise?”

Gosvämé, “Cintä, anxiety, arises in the mind from not obtaining the desired
object, or by expecting the worst, or by unfortunate happenings.” 

Vijaya, “How does mati arise?”

Gosvämé, “Mati, thoughtfulness, arises through evaluation and deliberation upon
something.” 

Vijaya, “How does dhåti arise?”

Gosvämé, “Dhåti, is steadiness of the heart arising through the acquisition of
the prized object and the absence of misfortune.” 

Vijaya, “How does harña, jubilation, arise?”

Gosvämé, “The exultation and pleasure one feels by seeing one’s desired object
and winning the desired object is called haåsa.” 

Vijaya, “How does autsukya arise?”

Gosvämé, “Autsukya, eagerness, comes from the ardent desire to see and attain
one’s beloved.” 

“Vijaya, “In mädhurya-rasa, does augrya arise?”

Gosvämé, “Augrya, ferocity, violence, is not present in mädhurya-rasa, as we
have already pointed out.” 

“Vijaya, “How does amarña arise?”

Gosvämé, “Amarña, indignation, is expressed because of feeling unjustly
censured, disrespected, or insulted.” 

Vijaya, “How does asüyä arise?”

Gosvämé, “Asüyä, envy, may be ignited by another person’s good fortune, virtue,
and excellence.” 

Vijaya, “How does cäpalya arise?”

Gosvämé, “Cäpalya, fickleness or light-headedness, is caused by attachment or
aversion.” 

Vijaya, “How does nidrä arise?”

Gosvämé, “Exhaustion and extreme fatigue produce nidrä, sleep.” 

Vijaya, “How does supti arise?”

Gosvämé, “In supti indicates deep sleep, within which there is an absence of
dreams and reveries.” 

Vijaya, “How does prabodha arise?”

Gosvämé, “After awakening from slumber, one attains prabodha, perception.”

“So my dear Vijaya, this is the entire list of thirty-three vyabhicäré-bhäva
expressions. One should also understand the four stages of bhäva-utpatti,
source; bhäva-sandhi, conjunction; bhäva-çäbalya, strengthening; and
bhäva-çänti, pacification. The imminent appearance of bhäva is bhäva-utpatti.
The conjunction of two or more bhävas is bhäva-sandhi, which is subdivided into
two: the joining of different bhävas known as sa-rüpa-sandhi, and the friction
of opposing bhävas known as bhinna-sandhi. The mixing of many different bhävas
is bhäva-çäbalya; and the subsiding of a bhäva is called bhäva-çänti.”

From attentively listening to the dissertation of Çréla Gosvämé, Vijaya had now
acquired a good knowledge of the particular manner in which vibhäva, anubhäva,
sattvika bhäva, and vyabhicäré bhäva act as the sämagré, ingredients, of
mädhurya-rasa. His heart flooded with feelings of ecstatic joy; however, prema
was still undefined and unclear. Understanding this, Vijaya fell in tears at his
guru’s feet and said, “Gurudeva, kindly reveal to me why prema is still lacking
and in an obscure stage within my heart.”

Çréla Gosvämé answered, “Tomorrow you will hear about the esoteric principles of
prema. You certainly already know the sämagré that comprise prema, but prema
itself has not yet fully blossomed in your heart. Actually, sthäyi-bhäva is
prema—we have already discussed this topic in a general way. When you hear the
specifics within the brilliant radiance of ujjvala-mädhurya-rasa, you will
attain all-round perfection.”

With this Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé embraced Vijaya, who immediately offered
prostrate obeisances, asked permission to leave, and returned to his lodgings
deeply immersed in all that he had been blessed to hear.

Thus ends the thirty-fifth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Mädhurya-rasa,
Part Five

JDH 36: Mädhurya-rasa, Part Six

Chapter Thirty-six
Mädhurya-rasa, Part Six

The next day, Vijaya arrived at the Rädhäkänta temple punctually, his sprightly
movements revealing an inner eagerness. He offered prostrate obeisances to the
feet of Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé, who had detected the urgency of Vijaya and
immediately began to speak upon the subject of sthäyi-bhäva.

Gosvämé, “Mädhurya-rati is the sthäyi-bhäva of mädhurya-rasa.”

Vijaya, “What nourishes the appearance of mädhurya-rati?”

Gosvämé, “Mädhurya-rati is nourished by abhiyoga, expression of one’s emotions
to Kåñëa; viñaya,; sambandha, items in relationship to Kåñëa; abhimäna, by
asserted choice; tadéya-viçeña, Kåñëa’s unique nature and qualities, which act
as catalysts; upamä, poetic comparison of Kåñëa to other things; and svabhäva,
one’s innate nature of spontaneous love. The seven causes have been listed in
order of ascending merit; hence, rati generated from svabhäva is rati par
excellence.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, kindly elaborate upon these causes.”

Gosvämé, “To openly express one’s bhäva is abhiyoga. One may express one’s
feelings personally or another trusted person may do so on one’s behalf.” 

Vijaya, “What is viñaya?”

Gosvämé, “Viñaya means perception of the beloved Çré Kåñëa through the senses,
of which there are five categories: çabda, sound; sparça, touch; rüpa, form;
rasa, taste; and gandha, the fragrance.”

Vijaya, “What is sambandha?”

Gosvämé, “Sambandha indicates those items in relationship to Kåñëa and is of
four types: the kula, family; rüpa, beauty; guëa, qualities; and the lélä,
pastimes.”

Vijaya, “What is abhimäna?”

Gosvämé, “Abhimäna is the adamant attitude one takes in demanding a particular
object, Çré Kåñëa, in preference to all other beautiful and pleasing objects.”

Vijaya, “What is tadéya-viçeña?”

Gosvämé, “Tadéya-viçeña indicates the intimate items of Kåñëa that act as
catalysts to deepen love for Him, for example: padäìka, the sight of the
impressions of Kåñëa’s lotus feet within Çré Våndävana-dhäma; goñöha, that Kåñëa
roams and pastures the cows only within the limits of Çré Våndävana-dhäma; and
His tadéya priya-jana. Priya-jana, beloved persons, refers to those who
permanently exchange deep loving emotions with Kåñëa.”

Vijaya, “Now that is clear. Gurudeva, what is upamä?”

Gosvämé, “When, through love, Kåñëa is poetically compared to other beautiful
and attractive objects that is upamä.” 

Vijaya, “What is svabhäva?”

Gosvämé, “Svabhäva indicates the innate nature of spontaneous love that
manifests independently of external causes. It is of two types, nisarga and
svarüpa.” 

Vijaya, “What is nisarga?” 

Gosvämé, “Nisarga is an inner spiritual tendency that appears as a result of
previous dedication to purified devotional practice. Lifetimes of hearing and
chanting Kåñëa’s beauty, qualities, and pastimes are aids to awakening nisarga,
the inner devotional tendency. In other words, nisarga is the accumulation of
devotional merit by determined adherence to spiritual discipline over many
lifetimes. If there is a sudden surfacing of kåñëa-prema from devotional
activities such as çravaëa and kértana these devotional activities may be seen
as the immediate cause, however nisarga-svabhäva, possibly cultivated over many
lifetimes, is the actual efficient cause.” 

Vijaya, “What is svarüpa?”

Gosvämé, “Svarüpa indicates the causeless, self-perfect, beginningless, and
innate devotional penchant that independently manifests its own perfection.
There are three varieties of this spontaneous love: kåñëa-niñöhä, attached to
Kåñëa; lalanä-niñöhä, attached to the gopés; and ubhaya-niñöhä, attached to both
Kåñëa and the gopés. 

“Kåñëa-niñöha-svarüpa is unattainable by demoniac persons; it is available only
to persons endowed with the divine devotional nature, such as the devas.
Spiritually enlightened devotees attain the self-manifest lalanä-niñöha-svarüpa.
Even with minimal hearing about the beauty, qualities and pastimes of Kåñëa and
the gopés, lalanä-niñöha-svarüpa generates intense attraction for Kåñëa and the
gopés. When both kåñëa-niñöha and lalanä-niñöha-svarüpa are manifest by the
svabhäva, innate nature, it is known as ubhaya-niñöha-svarüpa, attachment to
both Kåñëa and the gopés.”

Vijaya, “Are all the aspects of mädhurya-rasa manifested by these seven causes:
abhiyoga, expression of one’s emotions to Kåñëa; viñaya, perception of Kåñëa
through the senses; sambandha, items in relationship to Kåñëa; abhimäna, by
asserted choice; tadéya-viçeña, Kåñëa’s unique nature and qualities, which act
as catalysts; upamä, poetic comparison of Kåñëa to other things; and svabhäva,
one’s innate nature of spontaneous love.” 

Gosvämé, “The love of the vraja-gopés for Kåñëa is innate and self-manifest.
Such devotion does not blossom because of abhiyoga, viñaya, etc. However, in the
progressive development of the many amorous pastimes these seven causes may
stimulate and contribute dynamically. The rati attained by the pure liberated
souls who are sädhana-siddha, perfected through sädhana, and nisarga-siddha,
perfected through innate spontaneous love, is awakened by the seven causes
starting with abhiyoga.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, it would be easier for me to understand this complex concept
with the help of a few examples.” 

Gosvämé, “Mädhurya-rati as alluded to in this context is obtainable exclusively
by rägänuga-bhakti. This specific rati is beyond the reach of vaidhé-bhakti as
long as such regulated practice is devoid of bhäva. On the level of
sädhana-bhakti those devotees who develop lobha for the mood of service of the
vraja-gopés towards Kåñëa gradually evoke mädhurya-rati through the first six
causes, not svabhäva, and especially by taking the shelter of the priya-jana of
Kåñëa. By following these methods, as one becomes a sädhana-siddha, one
spontaneously experiences the swell of exhilaration inherent in
lalanä-niñöha-svarüpa, being fixed in the mood of the gopés.” 

Vijaya, “How many types of mädhurya-rati are there?”

Gosvämé, “There are three kinds: sädhäraëi, ordinary, samaïjasä, good, proper,
balanced; and samarthä, boundless. Kubjä is the example of sädhäraëi-rati. Kubjä
desired her personal enjoyment with Kåñëa and because this rati is rooted in the
desire for selfish enjoyment, it is to be shunned as being of an inferior
nature. The rati experienced by the queens of Dvärakä is samaïjasä-rati,
appropriate attachment, because it is evoked through the codes of marital
conduct and tempered by social norms. The gopés of Vraja have samarthä-rati,
boundless attachment, which thus transcends all social norms and religiosity. It
is not the case that samarthä is asamaïjasä, improper behaviour; rather,
according to absolute transcendental analysis, it is actually ati-samaïjasä,
harmonious and most proper in all respects. 

“Sädhäraëi-rati, as displayed by Kubjä, may be compared to a valuable jewel; the
samaïjasä-rati of the Dvärakä queens is like a Cintämaëi, touchstone gem; and
the samarthä-rati of the gopés is like the most precious Kaustubha gem—there is
no more valuable object in all the three worlds.”

At this point, glistening rivulets of tears ran down Vijaya’s cheeks, and he
spoke in a choked voice, “What a wonderful topic! Prabhu, I am eagerly waiting
to hear the particulars of sädhäraëi-rati.”

Gosvämé, “Upon seeing Kåñëa directly, sambhoga-icchä, the desire for personal
amorous enjoyment, generates sädhäraëi-rati, which is neither deep nor
permanent. Since sädhäraëi-rati lacks emotional depth and the aspiration to
satisfy the senses of Kåñëa, then sambhoga, personal enjoyment, is understood to
be its prime motivation. However, when sambhoga-icchä subsides, then
sädhäraëi-rati progresses in emotional depth and thus aspires to serve the
senses of Kåñëa.”

Vijaya, “Kindly explain samaïjasä-rati.” 

Gosvämé, “When, upon hearing the attractive qualities of Kåñëa, a näyikä yearns
to become His wedded wife, then her intense love is known as samaïjasä-rati.
However, at times, in samaïjasä-rati the desire for personal enjoyment arises
and then the different bhävas prompted by such cannot fully captivate Kåñëa.”

Vijaya, “Kindly explain samarthä-rati.” 

Gosvämé, “To different degrees, sambhoga-icchä is an aspect of both
sädhäraëi-rati and samaïjasä-rati. However, when sambhoga-icchä is completely
absent and the lover only desires the enjoyment of the beloved that selfless
emotion is called samarthä-rati.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly clarify this matter.”

Gosvämé, “The desire for enjoyment takes two forms: the desire for one’s own
pleasure through one’s beloved; and the desire to offer pleasure to one’s
beloved. The former may be called käma, lust, because it seeks one’s own
pleasure and satisfaction, whereas the latter, being exclusively devoted to
enhancing the beloved’s pleasure, is prema. In sädhäraëi-rati, the käma is
pronounced; and in samaïjasä-rati, käma is not strong. However, in
samarthä-rati, the only the desire is that the beloved should enjoy, hence prema
is the very nature of samarthä-rati.”

Vijaya, “In sambhoga, union, with the beloved Kåñëa, the exhilaration from
touching the beloved must surely flood the heart of the lover. How then can the
desire for this pleasure be absent in samarthä-rati?”

Gosvämé, “Indeed, this desire is incumbent, yet in the hearts of those steeped
in samarthä-rati its presence is extremely weak. Moreover, when samarthä-rati
gradually becomes more resolute and powerful, it embraces and overwhelms any
trace of sambhoga-icchä and then samarthä-rati and sambhoga-icchä merge as one.
Since this rati is samarthä, capable, of superseding all other personal desires
and capable of subduing Kåñëa, it is called samarthä-rati.” 

Vijaya, “What is the special excellence that crowns samarthä-rati?”

Gosvämé, “Samartha-rati may manifest by contact with one or more of the seven
causes starting with abhiyoga or alternatively appear from one’s svarüpa;
however, as soon as samarthä-rati blossoms, all impediments to prema are
dissipated from one’s consciousness. Then samarthä-rati shines with blinding
intensity.”

Vijaya, “How is it possible that sambhoga-icchä merges with this spotless
samarthä-rati and acquires the same character?” 

Gosvämé, “The samarthä-rati exhibited by the beautiful gopés of Vraja is
exclusively meant for the enjoyment of Kåñëa. In sambhoga with Kåñëa they
certainly experience their own pleasure, however that happiness is only accepted
to bring further pleasure to Kåñëa. Therefore, when samarthä-rati absorbs
sambhoga-icchä, the amalgamation is one of sublime beauty that never allows the
independent assertion of sambhoga-icchä separate from the desire to satisfy
Kåñëa. In samaïjasä-rati, on the other hand, love is sometimes covered by the
desire for one’s own enjoyment.”

Vijaya, “How wonderful and enchanting! I yearn to hear the highest glories of
samarthä-rati.”

Gosvämé, “When samarthä-rati matures, it acquires the sublime state known as
mahä-bhäva, the pinnacle of the greatest spiritual ecstasy, which is sought by
all liberated souls. This state is attained by the five types of pure devotees,
each according to his eligibility.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, what are the gradations in this rati?”

Gosvämé, “The Ujjvala-nélamaëi, Sthäyi-bhäva-prakaraëa 53, states:

syäd òròhe ‘yaà ratiù premä prodyan snehaù kramäd ayam 
syän mänaù praëayo rägo‘nurägo bhäva ity api

“‘Rati in mädhurya-rasa is of one nature, and deepens when challenged through
viruddha-bhäva, conflicting elements. It is then called prema. Prema gradually
manifests its nectarean sweetness in increasing degrees as sneha, affection;
mäna, temperament; praëaya, love; räga, attachment; anuräga, further attachment;
and bhäva, ecstasy.’” 

Vijaya, “Is there a simple analogy to make this subject more easily understood?”

Gosvämé, “Take, for example, sugar-cane; the gradations of prema in order
resemble: the sugar-cane seed, the cane, juice, syrup, molasses, coarse sugar,
sugar, and sugar candy. Similarly, rati culminates in bhäva by varying degrees
and bhäva implies the ascension to mahä-bhäva.”

Vijaya, “Prema is applied as a general appellation to all the different
gradations of bhäva, although there are also separate terms for the ascending
levels. Why is it like that, Gurudeva?”

Gosvämé, “Sneha, mäna, praëaya, räga, anuräga, and bhäva are the six consecutive
levels of increasing ecstasy in prema. Hence, the spiritual authorities refer to
them all as prema. Kåñëa nourishes and reciprocates scrupulously according to
the nature and level of each devotee’s kåñëa-prema.”

Vijaya, “What is the essential characteristic of prema?”

Gosvämé, “In mädhurya-rasa, the youthful couple never lose their bond of loving
emotion even though there might appear a cause for the destruction of the
relationship, such as extended separation. This imperishable bond of love is
called prema.” 

Vijaya, “Are there different varieties of prema?”

Gosvämé, “Prema is of three kinds: prauòha, blossomed; madhya, intermediate and
maturing; and manda, lesser and immature.” 

Vijaya, “What is prauòha-prema?”

Gosvämé, “In prauòha-prema, the lover’s heart is greatly anguished to think that
her beloved may feel heart-pangs because of her forcibly delayed arrival at
their place of rendezvous.” 

Vijaya, “What is madhya-prema?”

Gosvämé, “In madhya-prema, the lover’s heart is not anguished by thought of the
beloved’s heart pangs.” 

Vijaya, “What is manda-prema?”

Gosvämé, “In manda-prema, the lover is sometimes unmindful of the wonders of the
beloved according to particular times and circumstances. Love of prolonged
intimacy that fails to evoke sacrifice or respect because the lovers are already
most familiar with each other, is called manda-prema. Although in this case the
prema is manda, mild, by its pure and intense nature there is still no trace of
neglect or disrespect towards the beloved. 

“Now, Vijaya, I would like to formulate the concepts of these three levels of
prema in simpler terms. When the lover cannot tolerate viçleña, the painful
feelings of separation, in the beloved, that level of prema is called
prauòhä-prema. When the lover can tolerate the viçleña of the beloved, that
level of prema is called madhyä-prema. When the lover is sometimes forgetful of
the viçleña of the beloved, that level of prema is called manda-prema.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, I have properly understood your explanations of prema. Kindly
tell me more about sneha, transcendental ecstatic loving affection.”

Gosvämé, “When prema enters perfection and brilliantly illumines the citta,
consciousness, it is known as sneha. Here the citta has attained the viñaya of
cit-prema. Therefore, sneha acquires a brilliant form that melts the heart with
bhäva. A marginal symptom of sneha is that the lover is never satiated, even by
continuous association with the beloved.” 

Vijaya, “Are there different levels of sneha?”

Gosvämé, “The heart of the kaniñöha-snehi, beginner in sneha, melts upon
physical contact with the beloved. The heart of the madhyama-snehi, intermediate
in sneha, melts immediately upon seeing the beloved, and the heart of the
çreñöha-snehi, highest in sneha, melts simply when the beloved is mentioned.” 

Vijaya, “Are there different types of sneha?”

Gosvämé, “In fact sneha is of two types: ghåta-sneha, love like ghee; and
madhu-sneha, love like honey.” 

Vijaya, “What is ghåta-sneha?”

Gosvämé, “The sneha which adds ädara, intense affectionate honour and adoration,
to prema is called ghåta-sneha. Ghåta, clarified butter, is not intrinsically
sweet as is honey; however, it becomes very delectable when sugar, honey, or
other ingredients are added. Similarly, ghåta-sneha is extremely relishable when
specific bhävas are mixed with it as condiments. Ghåta-sneha is cooling by
nature and when ädara is repeatedly added it thickens and becomes more
concentrated just like clarified butter or butter fat and so acquires the same
name.” 

Vijaya, “What exactly is ädara?”

Gosvämé, “Ädara, to give honour and adoration, sprouts from gaurava, respect,
which makes them interdependent. Although they are present in rati and bhäva,
etc., in sneha they find full expression. Thus, they are mentioned in this
context.” 

Vijaya, “What exactly is gaurava?”

Gosvämé, “When someone accepts a trusted person as guru, gaurava means the
respectful emotion that manifests from such an attitude. It is also called
sambhrama, awed respect, which is synonymous with ädara. Thus, when ädara,
honour, is mentioned, gaurava, respect, is automatically included.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly explain madhu-sneha.” 

Gosvämé, “When sneha is infused with the feeling that the lover madéyatva,
belongs—i.e. ‘He is mine’—and is thus the property of the beloved, then this
transcendental affection is known as madhu-sneha. This type of sneha is
excessively nectarean and the melting pot of many rasas. Being independently
most sweet and passionate, madhu-sneha has the properties to cause loving
inebriation and is thus heating. Therefore, having the characteristics of honey,
it is called madhu-sneha.” 

Vijaya, “What is the purport of madéyatva, to belong?”

Gosvämé, “Rati is displayed through two specific bhävas: firstly, ‘I belong to
my beloved’, and secondly, ‘My beloved belongs to me’. In the first of these
two, which is ghåta-sneha, bhäva-rati, ecstatic attachment, is expressed by the
näyikä when she thinks predominantly, ‘I belong to my beloved.’ In madhu-sneha,
the bhäva-rati of the näyikä is expressed predominantly as, ‘He belongs to me.’
In relationship to Çré Kåñëa, the sneha of Çré Candrävalé is ghåta-sneha and the
sneha of Çrématé Rädhikä is madhu-sneha.” 

Upon mention of Çrématé Rädhikä’s name, Vijaya quickly offered prostrate
obeisances to the lotus feet of his guru. He then sat down and continued with
his questions. 

Vijaya, “I would like to understand the complexities of mäna.”

Gosvämé, “When sneha is refined to the heights of excellence it acquires a new
texture of sweetness, characterized by a firmer, less forgiving attitude, mixed
with guile and craftiness towards the lover; then, it is called mäna.” 

Vijaya, “How many kinds of mäna are there?”

Gosvämé, “Mäna is of two kinds: udätta and lalitä.”

Vijaya, “What is udätta-mäna?”

Gosvämé, “Udätta-mäna is further subdivided into two: the first is a
däkñiëya-bhäva, generous submissive disposition of mind, straightforward, open
and free of diplomacy; the second is most diplomatic wherein the näyikä masks
her feelings under a most grave exterior that mildly exhibits the vämya-bhäva,
contrary mood. Udätta-mäna is refined only from ghåta-sneha.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I feel more inclined to lalitä-mäna, though I cannot explain
why.”

Gosvämé, “Lalitä-mäna is also of two kinds: kauöilya-lalitä-mäna, diplomatic and
guileful; and narma-lalitä-mäna, jestful and witty. Mäna provoked by guileful
intentions of the heart is called kauöilya-mäna, whereas narma-lalitä-mäna is
full of sportive pleasantries and sprightly humour. Both varieties of
lalitä-mäna are refined from madhu-sneha.” 

Vijaya, “What is praëaya?”

Gosvämé, “When mäna is reinforced with viçrambha, firm faith and trust, that
cultivates the mentality of equality and oneness of heart between beloved and
lover, it is called praëaya-prema.” 

Vijaya, “What does viçrambha mean in this context?”

Gosvämé, “Viçrambha is intimate confidence and trust and is the innate nature of
praëaya, being of two types: maitré and sakhya. However, viçrambha is not the
nimitta-käraëa, instrumental cause, of praëaya, but its upädäna-käraëa,
ingredient cause.”

Vijaya, “What is maitré-viçrambha?” 

Gosvämé, “Viçrambha mixed with vinaya, meekness and courtesy, is called
maitré-viçrambha.” 

Vijaya, “What is sakhya-viçrambha?” 

Gosvämé, “Sakhya-viçrambha is implicit trust free from all awe and fear and
permeated with the confidence that one’s beloved is controlled by one’s love.”

Vijaya, “Please clearly explain how praëaya, sneha, and mäna are related to each
other.”

Gosvämé, “In some instances, praëaya arises from sneha and then produces mäna.
In other circumstances, mäna arises from sneha and then produces praëaya. So we
see that according to the situation, mäna and praëaya are interchangeably
related as one another’s cause and effect. For this reason, viçrambha has been
delineated separately. The manifestation of maitra and sakhya is caused by the
difference in moods between udätta-mäna and lalitä-mäna, respectively.
Furthermore, when manifesting on the basis of praëaya, maitra becomes sumaitra
and sakhya becomes susakhya; the prefix ‘su’ indicates especially relishable.”

Vijaya, “What is the nature of räga?” 

Gosvämé, “When praëaya reaches its acme wherein even excessive grief is
pleasurable, at this point, räga is born.” 

Vijaya, “How many varieties of räga are there?” 

Gosvämé, “There are two varieties: nélimä and raktimä.” 

Vijaya, “How many kinds nélimä-räga are there?” 

Gosvämé, “Nélimä-räga is further divided into nélé-räga and çyäma-räga.” 

Vijaya, “What is the nature of nélé-räga?” 

Gosvämé, “Räga that by nature does not diminish and overtly displays itself
externally, unilaterally cloaking all other corollary bhävas, is known as
nélé-räga. This räga is seen in the relationship between Çré Candrävalé and Çré
Kåñëa.” 

Vijaya, “What is the nature of çyäma-räga?” 

Gosvämé, “Çyäma-räga is more timorous than nélé-räga and is exhibited through
auñädhaseka, the dispensing of medicine, hot fomentations and nursing, and so
on. This räga is born from nélé-räga, but only after a long time.”

Vijaya, “How many kinds of raktimä-räga are there?” 

Gosvämé, “Raktimä-räga is also of two varieties: kusumbha-räga and
maïjiñöhä-sambhava-räga.” 

Vijaya, “What is the nature of kusumbha-räga?” 

Gosvämé, “Räga that tenaciously adheres to the heart and swiftly escalates,
acting as a catalyst for releasing the brilliance of other rägas as well, is
called kusumbha-räga. In particular näyikäs, kusumbha-räga becomes steady and
fixed, however in other näyikäs this räga mixes with maïjiñöhä-räga. In this
case, kusumbha-räga occasionally wanes in the heart of the näyikä.”

Vijaya, “What is the nature of maïjiñöhä-räga?” 

Gosvämé, “Unlike kusumbha-räga, maïjiñöhä-räga never wanes but remains
permanently steady, not requiring extraneous stimuli. Maïjiñöhä-räga is
independently self-manifest and eternally perfect. This crowning räga is shared
between Çré Rädhä and Çré Kåñëa and heightens continuously. The conclusion is
that ghåta-sneha, udätta-mäna, maitra-viçrambha, sumaitra-praëaya, and
nélima-räga embellish the natures of Candrävalé and the queens of Dvärakä headed
by Rukmiëé; whereas, the progressively superior ragas—madhu-sneha, lalitä-mäna,
sakhya-viçrambha, susakhya-praëaya, and raktimä-räga—to their highest intensity
are found only in Çrématé Rädhikä. Also in Satyabhämä, a Queen of Dvärakä, these
symptoms of a left-wing gopé are occasionally displayed. 

“As previously discussed, all these different bhävas reside splendidly in the
beautiful gopés of Våndävana, engendering factiousness and thus polarizing them
into the camps of friends, neutrals, and enemies that we have already mentioned.
Learned, realized devotees through their transcendental wisdom perceive the
innate variations and combinations of the bhäväntara, diverse emotions, that
manifest the great emotional variety of the unlimited léläs. At this point in
our talks, the resultant unrestricted variegatedness of bhäva cannot be fully
delved into.”

Vijaya, “Which bhävas are addressed by the term bhäväntara?”

Gosvämé, “Sthäyi-bhäva in mädhurya-rasa, the thirty-three vyabhicäré-bhävas, and
the seven bhävas beginning with häsya add up to forty-one bhävas. This total is
indicated by the term bhäväntara.”

Vijaya, “Räga is now clear to me. Kindly describe anuräga.”

Gosvämé, “When räga soars to heights of new, ever-fresh bhäva—that allows the
näyikä to perceive the näyaka at every moment as novel and perennially
unique—then räga has been transformed into anuräga.” 

Vijaya, “What are the glorious wonders of anuräga?”

Gosvämé, “Through loving exchanges, this sublime prema incessantly ascends and
makes the näyaka and näyikä more and more subjugated to each other. Anuräga
wonderfully creates prema-vaicittya, ecstatic transformations of the heart on
account of deeply intense loving attachment and often manifests ecstatic desires
such as the longing to be born even as an inert object as long as that birth be
within Våndävana-dhäma. Furthermore, in feelings of vipralambha, separation,
from the näyaka, anuräga evokes in the näyikä a sphürti, mystical perception, of
Kåñëa’s presence and thus great ecstasy.”

Vijaya, “Grasping the concept of vaçé-bhäva, the näyaka and näyikä bringing each
other under control, and understanding the concept of wanting to be born as
trees and other inanimate objects in Våndävana-dhäma are easier ideas to
understand. However, Prabhu, kindly elucidate the more difficult
prema-vaicittya.” 

Gosvämé, “Prema-vaicittya describes the abundance of ecstatic loving emotion
that spontaneously brings about rapturous feelings such as a sense of grief
caused by a fear of separation from the beloved, even though the beloved is
still actually present. You will learn more about this later as prema-vaicittya
is included in vipralambha.”

Vijaya, “Very well, I now beg permission to hear about mahä-bhäva, the acme of
prema.”

Gosvämé, “Vijaya, my boy, in the realm of vraja-rasa my comprehension is rather
limited. What is the use of my insignificant realization next to the lofty
tattva of mahä-bhäva? However, whatever I have learnt from the instructions of
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé and Çréla Vakreçvara Paëòita by their mercy I will deliver to
you. All these conclusions are strictly in line with Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé and you
can perceive them best by simply depending upon his grace.” 

Vijaya, “Prabhu, I am an extremely lowly being and an ignorant enquirer. Kindly
formulate the esoteric essence of mahä-bhäva-tattva in a manner that is easily
comprehensible for me.” 

Gosvämé, “Çrématé Rädhikä is the äçrayä of anuräga, and correspondingly Kåñëa is
the viñaya of anuräga. Vrajendra-nandana Kåñëa, the son of Mahäräja Nanda, as
the icon of çåìgära-rasa is the ultimate epitome of viñaya-tattva and Çré
Rädhikä is the ultimate epitome of äçrayä-tattva. Her anuräga is her
sthäyi-bhäva. When Çré Rädhä’s anuräga escalates to its pinnacle and manifests
itself with sattvika-bhävas that are süddépta, brilliantly shining, then at this
height, anuräga culminates in mahä-bhäva.”

Vijaya, “Oh, how wonderful is mahä-bhäva! O mahä-bhäva, the superexcellent
mahä-bhäva! I am so blessed that I am able to perceive even slightly its
grandeur. It is the crown jewel of all bhäva. Prabhu, kindly satiate my ears if
you will—please give some examples of mahä-bhäva.” 

Gosvämé, “The Ujjvala-nélamaëi, Sthäyi-bhäva prakaraëa 155, states:

rädhäyä bhävataç ca citta-jatuné svedair viläpya kramäd
yuïjann adri-nikuïjara-pate nirdhüta-bheda-bhramam
citräya svayam anvaraïjayad iha brahmäëòa-harmyodare
bhüyobhir nava-räga-hiìgula-bharaiù çåìgära-karuù kåté 

“‘Våndädevé says to Kåñëa, “O enmaddened King of the Elephants who sports in the
beautiful groves and bowers upon the hilly slopes of Govardhana! In your eternal
unmanifest pastimes, the hearts of Rädhikä and Yourself melt in the radiance of
the mahä-sattvika transformations caused by unfathomable feelings of
inconsolable separation. Thus, the piteous fiery lamentation of separation has
melted the shellac that is Your hearts, mixing and making them as one. In order
to re-enact the same ecstatic pastimes within the mansion of Brahmä, the
material world, that same artist, çåìgära-rasa, has taken this shellac and mixed
it with the red vermilion of your ever-fresh räga, and so now your unmanifest
pastimes in the form of endless variegated bhävas are manifest upon the canvas
of Çré Våndävana-dhäma by the arrangement of Yogamäyä.”

Vijaya, “In whom does mahä-bhäva repose?”

Gosvämé, “Mahä-bhäva is unattainable by Kåñëa’s queens in Dvärakä; it is
manifest exclusively in the gopés of Vraja, headed by Çré Rädhä.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, why is that?”

Gosvämé, “In a relationship bound by nuptial vows, when loving emotions are
ruled by svakéya-bhäva, the conjugal identities of husband and wife, rati is
samaïjasä, balanced, which befits the vows of such a relationship. However, such
a balanced relationship cannot accommodate the continuous ecstatic emotional
exchanges that continually reach new heights in the uncharted emotional realms
of mahä-bhäva. In Vraja, some ladies do harbour slight fancies of svakéya-bhäva
in their hearts, but their pre-eminent bhäva is pärakiya. In that mood, rati is
samarthä, boundless. Thus, when samarthä-rati peaks, it is transformed into
mahä-bhäva.” 

Vijaya, “Are there variations within mahä-bhäva?”

Gosvämé, “Mahä-bhäva is the crystallized form of the most sublime nectar that
transforms all bhävas coming in touch with it, infusing them with the innate
nature of itself, mahä-bhäva. Mahä-bhäva appears in two variations: rüòha and
adhirüòha.” 

Vijaya, “What is rüòha-mahä-bhäva?”

Gosvämé, “In rüòha-mahä-bhäva all the sattvika-bhävas shine at the level of
uddépta, ablaze. Each bhäva is expressed through anubhävas.”

Vijaya, “What are the anubhävas in rüòha-mahä-bhäva?” 

Gosvämé, “The anubhävas of rüòha-mahä-bhäva are as follows: impatience flares up
even by the loss of a moment’s association with the beloved; emotions are
churned up in the hearts of those present just as witnesses; perception that a
kalpa is but a moment; anxiety that Kåñëa may suffer, although there is no
apparent reason to think so; the self and the world fade into oblivion; and
moments are drawn out to seem like ages. Some of these anubhävas are experienced
in sambhoga and others in vipralambha.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I beg you to elucidate, ‘Impatience flares up even by the
loss of a moment’s association with the beloved.’”

Gosvämé, “This anubhäva is caused by vaicittya-vipralambha, transformations of
the mind through separation, which cause the feeling of vipralambha even in
sambhoga. In this ecstatic condition even a moment’s separation of sight from
the beloved is felt as being unbearable. 

“When the gopés were visiting Kurukñetra, they once again saw Kåñëa after a long
interval. Yearning to feast their eyes upon their beloved, they felt that their
eyelids were an unbearable burden because, upon blinking, the eyelids blocked
their vision of Kåñëa for fractions of a second. Thus, the gopés, in their anger
and frustration, cursed providence, Lord Brahmä, for creating eyelids. To not
see Kåñëa for even the blinking of an eye was a feeling Kåñëa’s beloved gopés
could not tolerate.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, kindly explain, ‘Emotions are churned up in the hearts of
those present just as witnesses.’”

Gosvämé, “This anubhäva is exemplified by the kings, noblemen, and queens
present at Kurukñetra who were witnessing the gopés expressions of bhäva upon
meeting their beloved Kåñëa. Their hearts were churned up and agitated with
divine emotions.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I humbly request you to elucidate, ‘A kalpa seems but a
moment.’”

Gosvämé, “This anubhäva is described best by the feelings of the gopés during
the night of the räsa-lélä dance, which by Kåñëa’s yogamäyä potency was expanded
to be as long as a kalpa—a night upon planet of Lord Brahmä. Nevertheless, to
the gopés the räsa-lélä seemed to end too quickly, in less than even a moment.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I ask you to explain, ‘Anxiety that Kåñëa may suffer,
although there is no apparent reason to think so.’”

Gosvämé, “This anubhäva is aptly depicted in the Çrémad Bhagavatam, 10.31.19: 

yat te sujäta-caraëämburuhaà staneñu
bhétäù çanaiù priya dadhémahi karkaçeñu
tenäöavém aöasi tad vyathate na kià svit
kürpädibhir bhramati dhér bhavad-äyuñäà naù

“‘O dearly beloved! Your lotus feet are so soft that we place them very gently
upon our hard breasts, fearing that Your feet will be hurt. Our life rests only
in You. Our minds, therefore, are filled with anxiety that Your tender feet
might be wounded by pebbles as You roam about on the forest paths.’

“Here, without true cause, the gopés deeply lament that when they place Kåñëa’s
lotus-petal-soft feet upon their hard breasts, the delicate soles of His lotus
feet may be hurt.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, kindly clarify, ‘The self and world fade into oblivion.’”

Gosvämé, “This anubhäva exemplifies that, on the one hand, delusion cannot enter
the lover’s consciousness because of incessant remembrance of Kåñëa, but, on the
other hand, on account of ecstatic love, the lover’s consciousness may enter an
internal state wherein there is total oblivion of the body and external
reality.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I request you to illuminate, ‘Moments are drawn out to seem
like ages.’”

Gosvämé, “This anubhäva is kñaëa-kalpatä, which Kåñëa describes in His
conversation with Uddhava, ‘When I was in Våndävana in the company of the gopés
of Vraja, their nights were over in a moment, but when I left, their nights
seemed as endless as a kalpa.’” 

Vijaya, “I have understood rüòha-bhäva. Kindly explain in detail the bhäva par
excellence, adhirüòha-bhäva.”

Gosvämé, “When the anubhävas of rüòha-bhäva reach their climax and sparkle with
extraordinary splendour, then the loving emotions enter the realm of
adhirüòha-bhäva.” 

Vijaya, “How many kinds of adhirüòha-bhäva are there?”

Gosvämé, “This wonderful bhäva is of two hues: modana and mädana.”

Vijaya, “What is modana-adhirüòha-bhäva?”

Gosvämé, “In mahä-bhäva, when the entire spectrum of sattvika-bhävas being
exchanged between the näyikä and näyaka, Çré Rädhä and Çré Kåñëa, scintillates
exceptionally, higher than even the uddépta, blazing, level, then this is called
modana-adhirüòha-bhäva. In modana-adhirüòha-bhäva, both Çrématé Rädhikä and Çré
Kåñëa are overcome with anxiety and discontent. Furthermore, in
modana-adhirüòha-bhäva, the love of Çrématé Rädhikä touches heights of ecstasy
unknown to all the other gopés.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I am eager to learn about some particulars of
modana-adhirüòha-bhäva—for instance, in whom does this bhäva reside?”

Gosvämé, “Modana-bhäva is only present in the yütha of Çrématé Rädhikä, nowhere
else. Modana is the favourite pleasure arena of the hlädiné çakti. At a certain
stage, in viraha-daçä, the anguish of separation, modana converts to mohana and
then, as viraha-daçä becomes all-encompassing, all the magnificent
sattvika-bhävas radiate at the level of süddépta, greatest brilliance.”

Vijaya, “What are the anubhävas in the state of mohana?”

Gosvämé, “Some of the symptoms are that Çré Kåñëa swoons unconscious in the
embrace of a näyikä who is not Çrématé Rädhikä. For example, this may occur in
Dvärakä when He is in the embrace of Queen Rukmiëé and remembers His amorous
pastimes with Çrématé Rädhikä in the leafy bowers of Våndävana. Çrématé Rädhikä
accepts the severest hardship and grief in the pain of separation and yet wishes
only for Kåñëa to be happy. Yearning for union with Kåñëa brings such a pang of
separation to the heart of Çrématé Rädhikä that the entire material creation and
even Vaikuëöha are plunged into the deepest sorrow. Even birds and beasts shed
tears as Çrématé Rädhikä expresses to her intimate sakhés that her heart pangs
may cause Her death, and if this were to happen then her body should be covered
with earth so that the burial spot may bring consolation to her beloved, Çré
Kåñëa. Only Çrématé Rädhikä, the Queen of Våndävana, is embellished with the
infinite depth of these anubhävas of mohana-adhirüòha-bhäva. Furthermore, the
super-excellent splendour of the saïcäri-bhävas of mohana-adhirüòha-bhäva is
fully manifested in Çrématé Rädhikä alone.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, if you consider it appropriate, kindly elucidate the
divya-unmäda-lakñaëa, symptoms of spiritual madness, you have just briefly
described.”

Gosvämé, “When mohana-adhirüòha-bhäva enters its zenith an amazing and
inexplicable condition of the mind known as divya-unmäda is created, which is a
mental state very similar to bhrama, delusion. Divya-unmäda is of many different
varieties, two of which are udghürëä and citra-jalpa.”

Vijaya, “What is udghürëä?”

Gosvämé, “When many astonishing but helpless endeavours are made in
divya-unmäda, this is known as udghürëä, ecstatic unsteadiness and incoherence.
Çrématé Rädhikä was in the grips of udghürëä after Kåñëa had left for Mathurä,
Her mind benumbed by the pangs of separation. At times, she thought that Kåñëa
was on His way back, thus she hurriedly arranged everything in the kuïja.
Sometimes, like an outraged wife, she chastised the black clouds for infidelity,
mistaking them for Kåñëa. Sometimes, in the darkness of night, she secretly
hurried to an imagined rendezvous with Kåñëa.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly explain citra-jalpa.”

Gosvämé, “When the näyikä meets the intimate friend of the näyaka, feeling the
acute pangs of separation, she unburdens her love-laden heart by discussing many
confidential matters that may go through a whole range of emotions from garva,
awed respect towards the beloved, to utkaëöha, excessive eagerness for union.
Such a conversation is termed citra-jalpa, varieties of mad emotional talks.” 

Vijaya, “What are the variations in citra-jalpa?”

Gosvämé, “The ten limbs of citra-jalpa have been delineated in the Bhramara-gétä
section of the tenth canto of the Çrémad Bhägavatam, they are prajalpa,
parijalpa, vijalpa, ujjalpa, saïjalpa, avajalpa, abhijalpa, äjalpa, pratijalpa,
and sujalpa.”

Vijaya, “Kindly explain prajalpa.”

Gosvämé, “On account of the innumerable and wonderful inflections in the amazing
range of bhävas, citra-jalpa is very personal and difficult to fully describe,
but some of its aspects can be expressed. 

“To narrate insultingly with gesticulations induced by feelings of malice, envy,
and pride, about the tactless inappropriate behaviour of one’s beloved is
defined as prajalpa.” 

Vijaya, “What is parijalpita?”

Gosvämé, “In the madness of love, to expertly point out the personal faults of
one’s beloved, Kåñëa—such as cruelty, treachery, fickleness, heartlessness, and
ingratitude—is called parijalpita.” 

Vijaya, “What is vijalpa?”

Gosvämé, “Within Her heart the näyikä feels deep love for Kåñëa, but externally
she uses harsh and cutting remarks towards Him. These are symptoms of vijalpa.” 

Vijaya, “What is ujjalpa?” 

Gosvämé, “When with offended pride and feeling both jealousy and respect, the
näyikä angrily slanders Kåñëa for his cheating ways in the art of love, it is
known as ujjalpa.” 

“Vijaya, “What is saïjalpa?”

Gosvämé, “Feeling deep resentment, the näyikä exposes Kåñëa’s ungratefulness in
love with many cryptic and humorous words of derision. This is called saïjalpa.”


Vijaya, “What is avajalpa?”

Gosvämé, “In the anger of avajalpa, Kåñëa is declared to be hard-hearted, lusty,
and sly, and therefore one is fearful that one’s hopeless attachment to Him may
prove to be self-destructive.” 

Vijaya, “What is abhijalpa?”

Gosvämé, “Lamenting and making witticisms such as: ‘When Kåñëa even causes the
pain of separation to innocent birds such as His pet parrot and peacocks, then
it is certainly futile to become attached to Him,’ is defined as abhijalpa.” 

Vijaya, “What is äjalpa?”

Gosvämé, “Feeling despondency, the näyikä professes apathy towards Kåñëa because
of His deceitful and merciless ways in love that bring only distress to her. She
suggests how pleasurable it would be to forget Him and pay attention to
something else. These are the symptoms of äjalpa.” 

Vijaya, “What is pratijalpa?”

Gosvämé, “In pratijalpa, the näyikä soliloquises about Kåñëa’s libidinous
desires being more befitting a pirate or the like. Therefore, if she were to
meet Him that would certainly be rash and foolhardy when He is already romancing
so many other women—but pretending to be interested in her alone. This message
is given by the näyikä to the awaiting messenger sent by Kåñëa.” 

Vijaya, “What is sujalpa?” 

Gosvämé, “When the näyikä is grave, humble, and listless because of pangs of the
heart, but straightforwardly and repeatedly enquires about Kåñëa with
unrestrained eagerness in love, this is called sujalpa. This completes the list
of citra-jalpa.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, am I eligible to hear about mädana-bhäva, passionate loving
emotion?”

Gosvämé, “When the topmost exalted prema that is the essence of the
hlädiné-çakti, Çré Rädhä, is most splendidly and brilliantly manifested, that is
called mädana-bhäva. Mädana-bhäva is eternally reposed within Çré Rädhä and is
Her essential and characteristic feature.” 

Vijaya, “Prabhu, is érñä an element of this bhäva?”

Gosvämé, “Yes, érñä—grudge, envy, jealousy—has a very strong presence in mädana.
Érñä, in mädana-bhäva, is sometimes directed even towards inert objects
incapable of reciprocation. Also, in mädana, Çrématé Rädhikä glorifies those
persons or items that because of their close association with Kåñëa exude an
aura indicative of Kåñëa, although She, Çré Rädhä, is actually at the same time
in close union with Her beloved Kåñëa. Therefore, Çrématé Rädhikä sometimes
speaks jealously of Kåñëa’s garland of wild flowers, whereas, on the other hand,
she may generously eulogize the pulindä tribal women who closely associate with
Kåñëa. These are some expressions of mädana-bhäva.”

Vijaya, “Under what conditions does mädana-bhäva manifest?”

Gosvämé, “Generally, the multi-hued mädana-bhäva manifests only in saàyoga-lélä,
pastimes of union between Rädhä and Kåñëa. Thus, mädana-bhäva appears in many
diverse ways and innumerable shades in the nitya-lélä of the divine loving
couple.”

Vijaya, “Are there any quotes from illustrious sages about mädana-bhäva?”

Gosvämé, “Mädana-rasa is endless and unlimited. Therefore, the complete
movements and influence of mädana-bhäva are unknown even to Kåñëa. For this
reason even Çukadeva Gosvämé was unable to describe mädana-bhäva completely,
what to speak of devotional philosophers such as Bhärata Muni, the great
preceptor of rasa-tattva.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I have just heard from you something quite astonishing.
Kåñëa, the absolute repository of rasa and the complete enjoyer of rasa, is
unable to know the full extent of mädana-rasa. How is this possible?” 

Gosvämé, “Kåñëa is Himself the very fountainhead of all rasa. He is unlimited,
omnipresent, omniscient and omnipotent—nothing is unattainable or unknown to
Him. Yet, the eternal and intrinsic nature of Kåñëa is inconceivable and
simultaneous oneness and difference and thus in this context of rasa He is
eternally one with and different from all rasa simultaneously. As the Deity and
embodiment of all rasa, He is the Supreme Enjoyer, absolutely ätmäräma. In this
condition, no rasa remains separate from or independent of Him, but exists as an
element of His very being. However, Kåñëa is simultaneously the source of the
many rasas and their unlimited play and interactions ‘external’ to Himself.
Hence, being the embodied Deity of rasa, He enacts pleasurable pastimes with His
many extroverted rasas; this mixing of the internal rasa of ätmäräma with the
variety of rasas ‘external’ to Himself creates a unique and most nectarean blend
of rasa. 

“Therefore, by experiencing both His ätmä-gata-rasa, internal, and His
parä-gata-rasa, extroverted rasas, Kåñëa relishes the ecstasy of lélä in
ever-increasing unlimited diversity. The parä-gata-rasa expands from Kåñëa and
is embodied in the form of His hlädiné-çakti, Çré Rädhä. From Çré Rädhä, the
parä-gata-rasa grows in profuse variety and reaches full bloom as the
pärakiya-rasa of Våndävana. Thus, mädana-rasa reaches its highest experience in
the most blissful and rarefied realm of pärakiya-rasa-lélä that is most
enchanting to the internal ätmä-gata-rasa of Kåñëa. In its purest form,
pärakiya-rasa is present in the aprakaöa-lélä, unmanifest pastimes, of Goloka
Våndävana, and the same pure transcendental pastimes are manifest upon the
earthly plane at Vraja-gokula. However, to the illusioned eyes of this world,
these pastimes appear to be the activities of the mäyä-çakti.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, I am eternally grateful for the kindness you have shown me.
Kindly give a summary of the bhävas in the nectar ocean of mädhurya-rasa.” 

Gosvämé, “The variety of bhävas manifested by the vraja-gopés is most wonderful
and transcendental in character, thus a true understanding is outside the
jurisdiction of mundane debate and logic—the full analytical delineation is
impossible. The scriptures declare that Çrématé Rädhikä had her natural inborn
räga prior to meeting Kåñëa at the stage of pürvaräga, introductory courtship.
This räga—which should be understood to be mahä-bhäva—blossomed in a particular
ambience to sneha, which progressively manifested mäna, temperament; praëaya,
love; räga, attachment; anuräga, further attachment; bhäva, ecstasy; and
mahä-bhäva, greatest ecstasy. To have a full understanding of even just some
aspects of these transcendental emotions is practically impossible.
Nevertheless, what is confirmed is that lesser types of rati cannot attain to
mahä-bhäva. 

“When sädhäraëi-rati, ordinary attachment, reaches its full maturity, it is
still in the hazy state of dhümäyitä, smoking—the unlit stage of attachment.
Samaïjasä-rati, balanced attachment, produces sneha, mäna, praëaya, on up to
anuräga; thus, this rati is radiant in the stage of dépta, aflame. In
rüòha-bhäva, rati is uddépta, ablaze, and in the modana-bhäva and mädana-bhäva
of samarthä-rati, rati is at the level of süddépta, greatly inflamed and ablaze.
Kindly understand that this summary is approximate as there may be variations
under the influence of a specific time, place, and circumstance of the lélä. In
conclusion, sädhäraëi-rati does not surpass prema; samaïjasä-rati is limited to
anuräga; and samarthä-rati reaches mahäbhäva.”

Vijaya, “What is the extent of rati in sakhya-rasa?”

Gosvämé, “The narma-vayasya-sakhä experiences rati up to anuräga, but the sakhäs
like Subala experience even mahäbhäva.” 

Vijaya, “The symptoms of sthäyi-bhäva you described earlier ultimately culminate
in mahäbhäva. Why are there different rasas towards Kåñëa although sthäyi-bhäva
is one and the same principle?”

Gosvämé, “There are varying characteristic features in sthäyi-bhäva, therefore
distinctions of rasa appear. In unmixed sthäyi-bhäva standing alone, no intimate
rasa is displayed without interaction with the sämagré-bhävas. Therefore, when
the sämagré-bhävas are fused together with sthäyi-bhäva, the differences that
comprise the variety of rasa manifest. Sthäyi-bhäva assimilates sämagré in
proportion to its different levels of profundity and after interacting with them
attains the state of rasa towards Çré Kåñëa.”

Vijaya, “In mädhurya-rati, do the differences of rasa in the form of svakéya and
pärakiya exist eternally?”

Gosvämé, “Yes, svakéya and pärakiya are eternal rasas and the distinction
between them is not a material designation. If this were so, then all the rasas,
including mädhurya-rasa, could be seen as based upon material distinctions and
thus material in nature. Therefore, one should understand that the rasas are
manifested eternally based upon the transcendent reality. Whatever eternal
innate rasa the soul possesses, becomes the soul’s eternal creedal rasa with its
concomitant ruci, taste; bhajana, application; and präpti, perfection.
Svakéya-rasa is also present in Vraja. In that rasa, those who perceive Kåñëa as
their husband and thus identify themselves as His wives eternally possess ruci,
bhajana, and präpti according to their individual status.

“You must comprehend that the svakéya-bhäva of dvärakä-lélä is a manifestation
of vaikuëöha-tattva, while the svakéya-bhäva of vraja-lélä is an expansion of
goloka-tattva—thus the svakéya-bhäva of vraja-lélä is of a distinct and higher
status. You may perceive this same truth in another way as follows: The
svakéya-bhäva of Vaikuëöha is related to the tattva of Çré Väsudeva, who is a
catuù-vyüha expansion from Vrajanätha Çré Kåñëa, who is in His highest
manifestation in Goloka-dhäma.”

Saturated with the ecstasy of prema, Vijaya fell at Çréla Gosvämé’s feet to
offer daëòavat obeisances. Then, he slowly got up, took his leave, and returned
home.

Thus ends the thirty-sixth chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Mädhurya-rasa,
Part Six

JDH 37: Çåìgära-rasa, The Perfection of the Conjugal Mellow, Part One

Chapter Thirty-seven 
Çåìgära-rasa, The Perfection of the Conjugal Mellow, Part One

Vijaya was relishing the aspects of mädhurya-bhäva quietly in the innermost
recesses of his heart as he walked into the äçrama of his guru. After offering
daëòavat praëäma to Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé, he almost immediately began to
enquire, “Revered Guruji, I have grasped the concepts of vibhäva, anubhäva,
sattvika-bhäva, and vyabhicäré-bhäva. I have also understood the intrinsic
nature of sthäyi-bhäva. Nonetheless, even after combining the first four
sämagré-bhävas with sthäyi-bhäva, I am unable to kindle rasa within my heart.
Why is this so?”

Gosvämé, “Vijaya, once you comprehend the svarüpa of çåìgära-rasa, you will be
able to awaken rasa in sthäyi-bhäva.” 

Vijaya, “What is çåìgära-rasa?” 

Gosvämé, “When mädhurya-rasa reaches the heights of extreme delectability, it is
described as çåìgära-rasa and is of two kinds: vipralambha, love in separation;
and sambhoga, love in union and the enjoyment of pastimes together.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, kindly enlighten me about vipralambha.”

Gosvämé, “Whether they are in each other’s company or separated, the
preponderant bhäva that is stirred up in the hearts of the näyaka and näyikä
when they are estranged from their amorous partner and the longed for mutual
exchanges such as kissing and embracing is called vipralambha-bhäva. Vipralambha
has the special quality of enhancing sambhoga and is also known as viraha,
separation, and viyoga, absence.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, how can vipralambha cause augmentation of sambhoga?”

Gosvämé, “Just as a coloured cloth looks gayer when an extra hue is added,
vipralambha causes the revitalization of sambhoga-rasa, taking it to ever-new,
sublimely relishable heights. Without vipralambha-bhäva, sambhoga-rasa cannot be
fully nurtured.”

Vijaya, “Are there many variations of vipralambha?”

Gosvämé, “Vipralambha is of four kinds: pürvaräga, mäna, prema-vaicittya, and
praväsa.”

Vijaya, “What is pürvaräga?” 

Gosvämé, “The rati increasingly generated in the hearts of the näyaka and näyikä
by darçana, seeing, and çravaëa, hearing, of each other before their actual
meeting takes place is called pürvaräga.” 

Vijaya, “What is darçana?” 

Gosvämé, “Darçana indicates the various ways the lovers may glimpse each other
and is of three types: seeing Kåñëa in person; seeing His picture; and seeing
Him in a dream.”

Vijaya, “What is çravaëa?” 

Gosvämé, “Çravaëa indicates the various ways the lovers may hear of each other
and takes place through hearing stutis about the näyaka; descriptions from
another sakhé; messages from a düté; hearing a song praising the näyaka; or
other such means of information.”

Vijaya, “What are the causes of the rati thus generated?”

Gosvämé, “Previously, I enumerated the causes of rati in general, they are
abhiyoga, expression of one’s emotions to Kåñëa; viñaya, perception of Kåñëa
through the senses; sambandha, items in relationship to Kåñëa; abhimäna, by
asserted choice; tadéya-viçeña, Kåñëa’s unique nature and qualities which act as
catalysts; upamä, poetic comparison of Kåñëa to other things; and svabhäva,
one’s inner nature causing spontaneous love. These also apply as causes for the
appearance of rati in pürvaräga.”

Vijaya, “Is pürvaräga awakened first in the vraja-näyaka, Kåñëa, or the
vraja-näyikäs, the gopés?”

Gosvämé, “This point has to be deeply considered. In mundane society, the
ordinary woman is generally shyer than the ordinary man; therefore, the man
generally takes the initiative in approaching the woman. However, since woman’s
loving propensity is generally stronger, the vraja-näyikäs feel the stirrings of
pürvaräga earlier. According to the bhakti-çästras, pürvaräga awakens first in
the bhakta and Çré Kåñëa reciprocates accordingly, thus following in the
footsteps of the devotee. The vraja-gopés are the most exalted amongst the pure
devotees, therefore pürvaräga initially emerges from them as the exquisitely
beautiful first flush of rati.” 

Vijaya, “What are the saïcäri-bhävas in pürvaräga?” 

Gosvämé, “Vyädhi, disease; çaìkä, apprehension; asüyä, jealousy; çrama,
lassitude; klama, fatigue; nirveda, indifference; autsukya, eagerness; dainya,
meekness; cintä, contemplation; nidrä, swooning, sleep; prabodhana, offering
oneself submissively; viñäda, lamentation; jaòatä, inertness; unmäda, craziness;
moha, bewilderment; and måtyu, longing for death, are the preponderant
saïcäri-bhävas, aggressive disturbing ecstasies.” 

Vijaya, “How many types of pürvaräga are there?”

Gosvämé, “Pürvaräga is of three varieties: prauòhä, fully matured; samaïjasä,
intermediate; and sädhäraëa, general.” 

Vijaya, “What is prauòhä-pürvaräga?”

Gosvämé, “Pürvaräga appearing in samartha-rati, boundless loving attachment, is
called prauòhä. On this platform, the näyikä experiences various daçäs,
conditions, starting from lälasa, deep amorous yearning, leading all the way to
måtyu, wishing for death. These daçäs, ten in number, are experienced because of
the acute and excessive upsurges of saïcäri-bhäva.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, I am interested to understand these ten daçäs, conditions.”

Gosvämé, “They have been discussed in the Ujjvala-nélamaëi, Pürvaräga 9, of
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé: 

lälasodvega jägaryäs tänavam jaòimätra tu
vaiyagryaà vyädhir unmädo moho mätyur daçä daça 

“‘The ten conditions of prauòhä-räga are lälasa, yearning; udvega, anxiety;
jägaraëa, sleeplessness; tänava, wilting of the body; jaòatä, being stunned;
vyagratä, impatience; vyädhi, disease; unmäda, madness; moha, trance; and måtyu,
wishing for death.’ 

“In prauòhä-räga, these daçäs become very deep and serious.”

Vijaya, “What is lälasa?”

Gosvämé, “The intense greed for attaining one’s abhéñöa, desired object, is
lälasa, yearning. It is accompanied by eagerness, restlessness, vertigo, and
deep breathing.”

Vijaya, “What is udvega?”

Gosvämé, “Anxiety and a paucity of peace of mind is udvega, which is symptomised
by deep heavy breathing; restlessness; becoming motionless; worrisome
thoughtfulness; tears; pallor; and perspiration.”

Vijaya, “What is jägaraëa?”

Gosvämé, “Jägaraëa is sleeplessness and is symptomised by becoming motionless,
also the senses dry up and there is a feeling of general weakness.”

Vijaya, “What is tänava?”

Gosvämé, “Wasting away of the body is tänava and is accompanied by anorexia,
bodily frailty, and delusional reeling of the mind. In describing this daçä,
some authorities propose viläpa, lamentation, instead of tänava.”

Vijaya, “What is jaòatä?”

Gosvämé, “Jaòatä is a mood of withdrawn, stunned inertness wherein one has lost
the capacity to discriminate between what is desirable or undesirable, respond
cogently to enquiries, and even the ability to see and hear. Sudden incoherent
outbursts, becoming stunned, deep sighing, and bewilderment attend upon this
state.”

Vijaya, “What is vyagratä?”

Gosvämé, “When the transformations caused by bhäva are held within the
consciousness and not manifest externally then this is sobriety and gravity.
Vyagratä destroys this sobriety, making gravity intolerable; thus appear
symptoms such as criticism, humility, self-castigation, melancholy, impatience,
and jealousy.”

Vijaya, “What is vyädhi?”

Gosvämé, “Vyädhi is brought about by the failure to achieve one’s beloved,
causing pallor and a feverish high temperature. Chills, shivering, desire,
delusion, deeply disturbed breathing and sighs, disease, and unconsciousness
attend this stage.”

Vijaya, “What is unmäda?”

Gosvämé, “Deeply absorbed in thought of the beloved, the näyikä sees the näyaka
everywhere and in everything, oblivious to normal circumstance. Attachment and
also aversion for the beloved, jealousy, deep breathing, unblinking eyes, and
extreme pangs of separation appear in concert with this stage.”

Vijaya, “What is moha?”

Gosvämé, “When the mind is conflicted and acts in a contrary manner this is
moha. Under moha, one becomes motionless, swoons, and falls down unconscious in
a trance.”

Vijaya, “What is måtyu?”

Gosvämé, “After the failure of every means to bring the beloved näyaka to her
loving service, the näyikä, feeling unbearable excruciating heart pangs of
separation, yearns and readies herself for death. With finality, she gives away
all her belonging to her dearmost confidential sakhés. In this state of
devastation, all items that deepen remembrance of the näyaka—the bumble bee, the
fragrant gentle breezes, the moonlight, kadamba flowers, clouds, lighting, and
peacocks—simply deepen her mood and she unburdens her heart to them.”

Vijaya, “Now kindly explain the second pürvaräga—samaïjasa-purva-räga.” 

Gosvämé, “Samaïjasa-purva-räga possesses features very characteristic of
samaïjasä-rati. Experienced prior to meeting the näyaka, immersed in this mood
the näyikä may gradually manifest ten daçäs that are abhiläña, yearning; cintä,
contemplation; småti, remembrance; guëa-kértana, singing the qualities of the
beloved; udvega, anxiousness; viläpa, lamentation; unmäda, madness; vyädhi,
illness; jaòatä, inertness; and måytu, longing for death.”

Vijaya, “In this context, what is the meaning of abhiläña?”

Gosvämé, “The intense yearning of the näyikä for her lover’s company and the
determined endeavours to fulfil that desire are called abhiläña in pürvaräga.
The anubhävas that embellish the näyikä are beautification with ornaments,
make-up, etc.; searching for excuses to slip out and meet the näyaka; and
exhibiting anuräga to the näyaka.” 

Vijaya, “Similarly, what is the meaning of cintä, in this context?”

Gosvämé, “Here, the condition of cintä indicates the deep contemplation by the
näyikä upon the means by which she may meet the näyaka. The näyikä arranges a
resting place in the kuïja, breathes deeply while sighing, and gazes seeing
imaginary images as see awaits the näyaka.”

Vijaya, “Here, what is meant by småti?”

Gosvämé, “Remembering all details about the näyaka—gleaned either from seeing or
hearing about Him previously—is here referred to as småti, remembrance.
Shivering, fatigue, pallor, tearfulness, internal absorption, sighing, and heavy
breathing attend this condition.” 

Vijaya, “Also, what is guëa-kértana?”

Gosvämé, “Praising the beauty and other excellences of the beloved näyaka is
called guëa-kértana. The attendant anubhävas include shivering, horripilation,
and choking of the voice. The rest of the six conditions of samaïjasä-pürvaräga,
namely: udvega, anxiety; viläpa, lamentation; unmäda, madness; vyädhi,
feverishness; jaòatä, inertia; and måtyu, death, are the same as in
samaïjasä-rati.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, I have understood samaïjasä-pürvaräga, now kindly describe the
third pürvaräga—sädhäraëa-pürvaräga.”

Gosvämé, “This sädhäraëa-pürvaräga is very characteristic of sädhäraëi-rati.
Here six daçäs—abhiläña, yearning; cintä, contemplation; småti, remembrance;
guëa-kértana, singing the qualities of the beloved; udvega, anxiousness; and
viläpa, lamentation—are expressed in a nascent way. As these conditions are not
complicated, I need not describe them. In this pürvaräga, käma-lekha-patra,
love-letters, flower-garlands, and such are secretly sent back and forth between
the näyikä and the näyaka through their individual confidants.”

Vijaya, “What exactly is meant by käma-lekha-patra?” 

Gosvämé, “Any missives expressing the awakening of loving attachment are called
käma-lekha-patra. They are of two kinds: nirakñara, without use of the alphabet;
and säkñara, using the alphabet.”

Vijaya, “What are nirakñara-käma-lekha?”

Gosvämé, “An example of a nirakñara-käma-lekha, message of love, would be an
etching of a half-moon made by one’s nails upon a red leaf, without any further
marks or letters.”

Vijaya, “What are säkñara-käma-lekha?”

Gosvämé, “Säkñara-käma-lekha are heartfelt messages written and sent between the
näyaka and näyikä, expressing their individual emotional condition in natural
language. The writing is completed with coloured inks made from combinations of
mountain minerals, musk, and juices obtained from red-coloured flowers. Large
flower petals are used instead of paper, and fibres from the stems of lotuses
are used as strings to hold the leaves together.”

Vijaya, “What are the developmental stages of pürvaräga?” 

Gosvämé, “Some authorities opine that the sequence of amorous conditions in
pürvaräga begins first with nayanapréti, seeing one’s object of love and
conveying attachment with one’s eyes. This leads progressively to cintä,
contemplation; äsakti, growing attachment; saìkalpa, determined vow;
nidräccheda, sleeplessness; kåçtä, growing weak and feeble; viñaya-nivåtti,
apathy and detachment from all other concerns; lajjä-näça, overcoming and loss
of shyness; unmäda, developing madness; mürchä, swoon and loss consciousness;
and finally, måtyu, preparing for death. Pürvaräga is common to both the näyikä
and näyaka, but appears first in the näyikä and then the näyaka.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, please describe mäna.” 

Gosvämé, “Mäna is that bhäva that prevents the näyaka and näyikä from expressing
their mutual love and thus engaging in their cherished embracing, kissing,
looking at each other, and sweet love talks, etc., even though they may be
directly in one another’s company. Mäna causes the appearance of the
saïcäri-bhävas such as despondent melancholy, doubtfulness, anger, restlessness,
pride, intolerance, jealousy, concealment of one’s feelings, unease, and grave
thoughtfulness.”

Vijaya, “Where does mäna find äçrayä?”

Gosvämé, “Praëaya is the mainstay for mäna. The rasa called mäna is not churned
up without the presence of praëaya, but if mäna should appear prior to praëaya
it becomes saìkoca, hesitant and inhibited. Mäna is of two kinds: sahetu, with
cause; and nirhetu, without cause.”

Vijaya, “What is sahetu-mäna?”

Gosvämé, “When the näyaka exhibits overtly an undue, heightened affection to a
vipakña-näyikä, consort of a rival camp, or a taöasthä-näyikä, consort of a
marginal camp, then upon seeing this the pradhäna-näyikä, foremost amorous
heroine, is inflamed with érñä, jealousy. This érñä, when rooted in praëaya,
evokes sahetu-mäna, which is mäna with a specific cause. 

“According to ancient preceptors of rasa-tattva, bhaya, fearfulness, cannot be
produced without sneha; similarly, érñä cannot be produced without praëaya,
highlighting the fact that mäna is simply a means of expressing conjugal love
between the näyaka and näyikä. The näyikä whose heart is flush with the deep
affection of praëaya, upon perceiving a greater degree of favour given by her
beloved toward her competitor näyikä, becomes intolerant and jealous. Once in
Dvärakä, Kåñëa narrated the incident to His queens of how He had given pärijäta
flowers to Queen Rukmiëé. Amongst the queens present, only the heart of
Satyabhämä was smitten with mäna, not the others; Satyabhämä was emotionally
disturbed by this show of love to Rukmiëé, who was of her opposite camp. This is
an example of vipakña-vaiçiñöya-anubhäva, emotional reactions brought about by
the rival camp member.”

Vijaya, “Are there different grades of vipakña-vaiçiñöya-anubhäva?”

Gosvämé, “Yes, there are three: çruta, by hearing; anumati, by inference; and
dåöña, by seeing.”

Vijaya, “What is çruta-vipakña-vaiçiñöya?”

Gosvämé, “Çruta-vipakña-vaiçiñöya is evoked when the näyikä hears from a
priya-sakhé, or from the parrot, Çuka, about the pastimes of the näyaka with a
näyikä of a rival camp.” 

Vijaya, “What is the second, anumita-vipakña-vaiçiñöya?”

Gosvämé, “Anumita-vipakña-vaiçiñöya is of three kinds: bhogäìka, gotra-skhalana,
and svapna. Signs of amorous enjoyment upon the body of Kåñëa and, similarly,
marks of lovemaking upon the body of a vipakña-sakhé give rise to bhogäìka,
inference based upon signs of amorous enjoyment. The näyaka mistakenly
addressing the näyikä with the name of a vipakña-sakhé is an example of
gotra-skhalana, inference based upon calling out the wrong name. In
gotra-skhalana, the näyikä feels overwhelming grief to the point of wishing for
måtyu. Svapna-anumati indicates that the näyikä feels mäna upon the basis of
visions obtaining while dreaming that may show the näyaka consorting with a
vipakña-sakhé, or she may overhear the näyaka talking of His love for a rival
näyikä-sakhé while they are lying together and he is speaking out while
dreaming, or she may overhear a priya-narma-sakhä like Vidüñaka describe while
dreaming the pastimes of the näyaka with a rival näyikä.” 

Vijaya, “What is the third, dåöña-vipakña-vaiçiñöya?”

Gosvämé, “When the näyikä directly sees Kåñëa engaged in love-play with a
competing vipakña-näyikä, it is called dåöña-vipakña-vaiçiñöya, and greatly
evokes mäna.”

Vijaya, “Sahetu-mäna is now clear, kindly describe nirhetu-mäna.”

Gosvämé, “Nirhetu-mäna is generated when without any apparent cause the näyikä
construes an imaginary reason to enter mäna, thus augmenting the deep affection
of praëaya. In fact, the natural transformation of praëaya is into sahetu-mäna,
while the viläsa, playful, aspect of praëaya further produces the emotional
grandeur called nirhetu-mäna, which may be described as praëaya-mäna. The
paëòitas of antiquity have compared the nature of prema with the crooked,
capricious movements of a snake. This explains why mäna–which serves to enhance
the relationship between the näyaka and näyikä—is of the two kinds, sahetu and
nirhetu, with and without reason. The prominent vyabhicäré-bhäva in this rasa is
avahitthä, camouflaging one’s emotions.”

Vijaya, “In what way is nirhetu-mäna abated?”

Gosvämé, “Nirhetu-mäna abates of its own accord, without extraneous
expediencies. As soon as häsya, humour, intrudes, nirhetu-mäna dissipates of
itself, its spell broken. However, the process of abating sahetu-mäna is more
elaborate and requires the näyaka to perform variously: säma, words of
consolation and reconciliation; bheda, diplomatic words; kriyä, the taking of
oaths and promises; däna, gifts and presentations; nati, humility, such as
bowing at the näyikä’s feet; upekñä, apparent detachment; rasäntara, provoking a
change of rasa; and so on. The ebbing away of sahetu-mäna is signalled by the
wiping away of the tears of the näyikä by the näyaka, by laughter, etc.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, what is meant here by säma?” 

Gosvämé, “Säma is the use of sweet, tender, pleasing words of consolation to
comfort the priyä-näyikä, beloved consort.”

Vijaya, “What is meant here by bheda?” 

Gosvämé, “Bheda is diplomatic remarks of two kinds: one is to show off one’s
greatness through verbal nuances and with gestures, and the second is to
instigate the sakhés to censure the withdrawn näyikä.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, what is meant here by däna?” 

Gosvämé, “Pretending to present as gifts objects like one’s crown, jewelleries,
and such is referred to as däna.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, what is meant here by nati?”

Gosvämé, “To fall pleadingly at the lover’s feet in humility is nati.” 

Vijaya, “What is meant in this context by upekñä?” 

Gosvämé, “When säma and other approaches to attenuate the mäna of the näyikä are
unsuccessful, taking a reticent attitude and perhaps even neglecting the näyikä
is called upekñä, neglect. Others authorities are of the opinion that upekñä
means to speak in innuendoes and double entendre, intent on pacifying and
humouring the näyikä.”

Vijaya, “Kindly elucidate rasäntara?” 

Gosvämé, “Rasäntara means to provoke a change of rasa, usually quickly, by
evoking fear, laughter, grave concern, or such like in the näyikä’s mind. There
are two kinds: yädåcchika and buddhi-pürvaka. Rasäntara, which occurs of its own
accord without the direct involvement of the näyaka, is yädåcchika, for example,
through natural causes and unexpected situations. Buddhi-pürvaka-rasäntara is
directly authored by the näyaka, who uses His sharp wit and intelligence to
exploit any situation to His advantage and thus convert the prevailing mood of
mäna of the näyikä.”

Vijaya, “Are there any other means to placate mäna?”

Gosvämé, “Yes, a particular place, a specific time, and the sweet sound of the
flute can mitigate the näyikä’s mäna, even without the help of säma and so on. A
laghu degree of mäna is tackled with little effort; the madhyama intensity of
mäna needs careful and concerted application; and the durjaya, serious almost
implacable, mäna demands immense patience and resourcefulness for its remission.
Some of the invectives used as adjectives and appellatives for Kåñëa by the
näyikäs embellished by mäna are Väma, unkind; Durlélä-çiromaëi, perpetrator of
atrocities par excellence; Kapaöa-räjä, king of deceivers; Kitava-räjä, prince
of perfidy; Khala-çreñöha, master of guiles; Mahä-dhürta, the champion of
cunning; Kaöhora, hard-hearted; Nirlajja, shameless; Atidurlalita, charmless,
hard to please; Gopékämuka, one who lusts after gopés; Ramaëé-cora, kidnapper of
women; Gopédharma-näçaka, enticer of saintly gopés from their path of dharma;
Gopé-sädhvé-viòambaka, harasser of gopés and chaste, saintly women; Kämukeçvara,
Lord of lusty desires; Gäòhatimira, one who puts others in darkness; Çyäma,
dark-hued one who puts others in illusion; Vastra-cora, cloth thief;
Govardhana-upatyakä-taskara, thief of the chastity of the gopés upon Govardhana
Hill; and many more.”

Vijaya, “What is prema-vaicittya?”

Gosvämé, “Immersed in intense love, the näyikä experiences distressful feelings
of separation from the beloved näyaka, even while He is present. This is called
prema-vaicittya. Total saturation in amorous feelings overwhelms the heart and
mind of the näyikä, thus projecting an anxiety of separation from the beloved.
Even though näyikä may actually be in the embrace of the näyaka, she helplessly
feels that He is not present, leading her to pine greatly for Him. This illusory
perception of separation is known as vaicittya.”

Vijaya, “What are the features of praväsa?”

Gosvämé, “After näyaka and näyikä have spent time together, suddenly they are
separated because one of them has left for a far place, or his or her individual
home, or even because of rasäntara, a change of mellow; this obstruction between
the näyikä and the näyaka is described as praväsa. In praväsa, which is a form
of vipralambha, all the vyabhicäré-bhäva symptoms of çåìgära-rasa are manifest
with the exception of haåsa, humour; garva, pride; mada, madness; and bréòä,
bashfulness. There are two types of praväsa: buddhi-pürvaka, intentional; and
abuddhi-pürvaka, unintentional.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly clarify buddhi-pürvaka praväsa.” 

Gosvämé, “Travelling far away to expedite one’s responsibility and work is
called buddhi-pürvaka praväsa. Giving pleasure, good instructions, and
fulfilling their desires are obligations Kåñëa feels to His devotees by His very
nature, and this may cause Him to travel away from the näyikä. Praväsa is
further divided into two: praväsa, a short distance just out of sight; and
sudüra-praväsa, long distance travels. The latter has three categories: past,
present, and future. In sudüra-praväsa the näyaka and näyikä remain in touch
with each other through sending messages.”

Vijaya, “Kindly elucidate abuddhi-pürvaka praväsa.” 

Gosvämé, “Unintentional praväsa caused by forces outside one’s control is
abuddhi-pürvaka praväsa. This praväsa has many variations, such as that caused
by the intervention of the devas, natural forces and events, fate, one’s
superiors, and so on. The aforesaid ten daçäs are manifest in praväsa, namely:
lälasa, yearning; udvega, anxiety; jägaraëa, sleeplessness; tänava, wilting of
the body; jaòatä, being stunned; vyagratä, impatience; vyädhi, disease; unmäda,
madness; moha, trance; and måtyu, wishing for death. When Kåñëa leaves,
travelling far away, these ten daçäs manifest in the näyikäs, indicating his
absence, and they also manifest in the näyaka Himself. Each of the loving
sentiments manifested by the ten daçäs is indicative of the many variations and
levels of prema, not all of which can be fully enumerated here. Some authorized
ancient treatises on rasa propose that vipralambha related to karuna, mercy,
requires independent description; however, since this rasa is another type of
praväsa a separate delineation is not essential.”

Vijaya deeply considered Çréla Gosvämé’s instructions on vipralambha. He
thought, “Vipralambha-rasa is not svataù-siddha, self-perfected or independent;
it is there solely to nurture sambhoga. For the conditioned jéva, the
vipralambha mood of separation appears in a specific form, which favourably
cultivates sambhoga-rasa and then dissipates once sambhoga is achieved. However,
on the plane of transcendence, vipralambha-bhäva will always have a residual
presence in the eternal lélä; otherwise, the fullest variegatedness in the
eternal lélä would not be possible.”

Thus ends the thirty-seventh chapter of Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Çåìgära-rasa,
The Perfection of the Conjugal Mellow, Part One

JDH 38: Çåìgära-rasa, Part Two

Chapter Thirty-eight 
Çåìgära-rasa, Part Two

Vijaya sat in a composed manner after humbly entreating Çréla Gopäla-guru
Gosvämé to speak further about sambhoga-rasa, the transcendental mellow of
enjoyment in union. As Çréla Gosvämé started his response affectionately, Vijaya
listened intently with spontaneous concentration.

Gosvämé, “We have already discussed the two types of kåñëa-lélä: prakaöa,
manifest; and aprakaöa, unmanifest. The intense yearning stemming from viraha,
separation, in vipralambha-rasa, as we have described previously, is a part of
the prakaöa-lélä upon earth. In all the aprakaöa-lélä, eternal unmanifest
pastimes—for example the räsa-lélä dance of Kåñëa with the gopés in the
transcendental world of Goloka Våndävana—viraha is practically absent. In the
scripture Mathurä-mähätmya, we find narrated that Kåñëa sports with the gopas
and gopés in Våndävana. The word kréòati—plays, sports—has been used in this
context to describe the activities of Kåñëa. By the use of this verb in the
present tense, eternal constant activity is clearly indicated. Therefore, in the
aprakaöa-lélä of Goloka Våndävana in the spiritual world, Kåñëa’s pastimes do
not include sudüra-praväsa-viraha, separation by long distance and time. 

“There, sambhoga-rasa is perpetual. The romantic exchanges such as embracing,
having rendezvous, and so on, between the näyaka and näyikä—respectively viñaya,
and äçrayä—that They eternally relish with immense exhilaration, reach ever-new
heights and produce a unique concoction of rasa known as sambhoga. Sambhoga is
divided into two sections: mukhya, principal; and gauëa, secondary.” 

Vijaya, “What is mukhya-sambhoga?”

Gosvämé, “In the awakened state, when sambhoga is dynamic, it is called
mukhya-sambhoga, principal enjoyment, which is further sub-divided into four
parts. The sambhoga that occurs soon after pürvaräga is called saìkñipta, simple
and brief. The sambhoga that occurs after feelings of mäna is known as saìkérëa,
restricted. The sambhoga that is relished after a separation, perhaps because of
a short journey, is termed sampanna, enriched. And, the sambhoga that is
experienced after a long sojourn is named samåddhimän, opulent, flourishing and
perfectional.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly further elucidate saìkñipta-sambhoga?”

Gosvämé, “The sambhoga that ensues after pürvaräga is saìkñipta, brief. Here,
because of tentative emotions such as apprehension and shyness, the näyaka and
näyikä enjoy brief and furtive kisses, embraces, and so on.” 

Vijaya, “Please further clarify saìkérëa-sambhoga?”

Gosvämé, “The sambhoga following mäna is saìkérëa, reserved and restricted.
Saìkérëa-sambhoga is a blend of opposing tastes, much like a steaming cup of
sugarcane juice—sweet, but burning hot. The näyikä still feels some annoyance
with the näyaka, yet the sweet relish of His touch and kisses binds her heart.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly further explain sampanna-sambhoga?”

Gosvämé, “The näyikä’s delight in seeing her lover after His return from a short
journey is called sampanna-sambhoga, strengthened, enriched union, and is of two
kinds: ägati, known arrival; and prädurbhäva, joyous appearance. Coming back as
a part of a daily routine, such as Kåñëa returning from grazing the cows as the
gopés feast their eyes upon Him, is ägati-sampanna-sambhoga. The sudden
unexpected appearance of Kåñëa amongst the anxious gopés ready to fully engage
the amorous desires of the love-smitten näyikä is prädurbhäva-sambhoga.
Prädurbhäva is the most desirable and satisfying state for the näyikä and
creates a festive cascading high tide in the ocean of transcendental bliss.”

Vijaya, “What is samåddhimän-sambhoga?”

Gosvämé, “Samåddhimän-sambhoga, opulent, flourishing union, arises after
sudüra-praväsa. Independent forces such as superiors or social etiquette impose
long separation between the näyikä and her faraway beloved näyaka and so their
meeting is not always possible. When this situation is reversed and the näyaka
returns, the näyikä’s joy is a boundless ocean, and the bliss she savours is
designated, samåddhimän-sambhoga. This sambhoga is of two kinds: channa,
covered, hidden by immediate circumstances; and prakäça, freely displayed
because of a lack of immediate constraints. Anyway, it is not necessary to
elaborate upon these distinctions here.” 

Vijaya, “Prabhu, could we go into the subject of gauëa-sambhoga?” 

Gosvämé, “Sambhoga in the dream state when Kåñëa appears and performs special
suitable pastimes is known as gauëa-sambhoga. The dreams are of two kinds:
sämänya, general, and viçeña, significant; hence, gauëa-sambhoga is also of two
corresponding kinds. The dreams of Kåñëa that occur when the vyabhicäré-bhäva of
nidrä is prominent are in this context referred to as sämänya, general, usual.
However, the distinguishing feature of viçeña-sambhoga is that the distinct
visions of Kåñëa that it affords fully evoke sthäyi-bhäva and all the
saïcäri-bhävas related to the sambhoga of jägrata, the awakened state. This
indicates an extraordinary parallel between viçeña-sambhoga and
jägrata-sambhoga. Moreover, just like mukhya-sambhoga, the visions of Kåñëa in
viçeña-sambhoga have the same four divisions: saìkñipta, brief; saìkérëa,
constricted; sampanna, enhanced; and samåddhimän, very opulent.” 

Vijaya, “This point is a little confusing. In a dream there is practically no
actual reality, therefore how can the spiritual fulfilment experienced in this
secondary state be almost equivalent to the principal
mukhya-samåddhimän-sambhoga?”

Gosvämé, “On the spiritual plane, the vision during svapna, the sleeping state,
and the meeting during jägrata, the awakened state, are virtually identical in
nature. An appropriate example is the case of Üñä and Aniruddha. Üñä was in her
quarters inside Bäëäsura’s palace in Çoëitapura, dreaming of enjoying the
embrace of Aniruddha, who was at the same time far away in Dvärakä, himself also
dreaming of enjoying with Üñä. The exact same thing occurs to Kåñëa and His
beloved gopés. This is, of course, not possible for conditioned souls to
experience. The direct and tangible proof of this is that when transcendental,
liberated devotees receive ornaments and such in their wondrous dreams, they
still possess them upon awakening. 

“Thus, the svapna, visionary dreaming, of transcendence is of two varieties:
jägaräyamäna-svapna, the meeting through vision while one is dreaming whilst
asleep: and svapnäyamäna-jägara, the meeting through vision while one is
daydreaming whilst awake. The fourth stage in yogic perfection is samädhi, total
absorption; however, the gopés have superseded even this state of consciousness
by attaining the fifth level known as prema. Their dreams have nothing in common
with ordinary dreams that are mundane by nature and fictitious being conducted
by the triple guëas of the mäyä-çakti. The dreams of the gopés, belonging to the
realm of absolute reality, are supramundane and transcendental. Thus, Kåñëa’s
dalliances are so wonderful and unique that even through a kaleidoscope of
dreams, which may even be punctuated with mahä-bhäva, He gives actual pleasure
to His beloved gopé lovers.” 

Vijaya, “In particular, kindly enumerate some of the varieties of
sambhoga-rasa?”

Gosvämé, “They are sandarçana, mutual scrutiny upon meeting; jalpa, witty
garrulity; sparçana, touching; vartma-rodhan, blocking one another’s way;
räsa-lélä dance; yamunä-jale keli, sporting in the Yämuna; nauka-viläsa,
pleasure boat-rides; puñpa-caurya-lélä, stealing flowers; däna-keli, demanding
imaginary taxes from one another; kuïje lukocuri-khelä, playing hide-and-seek in
the kuïjas; madhu-päna, drinking and becoming intoxicated by beverages made from
honey; stré-veça-dhäraëa, Kåñëa covertly dressing as a gopé; kapaöa-nidrä,
shamming sleep to secretly hear the conversation of the beloved; dyüta-kréòä,
playing dice and extracting penalties; vastra-äkarñana, tugging at the dress of
one’s lover; cumbana, kissing or drinking nectar from the lips of one’s lover;
älingana, embracing one’s lover; nakha-arpana, scratching one’s lover with one’s
nails; bimba-adhara-sudhä-päna, drinking the nectar from the lips of the beloved
that are like bimba fruit; and nidhuvana-ramaëa-samprayoga, conjugal union in
the pleasurable resting forest groves.”

Vijaya, “Guruji, apparently there is a difference between lélä-viläsa,
pleasurable playful joyful pastimes, and samprayoga, conjugal union, which of
these is more blissful?”

Gosvämé, “Lélä-viläsa is definitely more satisfying and blissful than
samprayoga.”

Vijaya, “What endearing names and expressions do the gopés use to address
Kåñëa?”

Gosvämé, “With the deepest transcendental affection the joyful sakhés address
Kåñëa with appellations, such as: ‘Hai, Gokulänanda, O personified bliss of
Gokula; Hai, Govinda, O joy of the cows, the land and the senses; Hai,
Goñöhendra-kula-candra, O full moon of the royal dynasty of cowherd-men; Hai,
Präëeçvara, O Lord of the heart; Hai, Sundarottaàsa, O crown of beauty; Hai,
Nägara-çiromaëi, O crest jewel of paramours; Hai, Våndävana-candra, O
resplendent moon of Våndävana; Hey, Gokula-räjä, O king of Gokula; and Hai,
Manohara, O stealer of the mind and heart.’” 

Vijaya, “Prabhu, I understand that the pastimes Kåñëa are both prakaöa,
manifest, upon this supramundane plane of Vraja-gokula and aprakaöa, unmanifest,
upon the transcendental plane of Vraja-goloka and yet both types of lélä are of
the same tattva; however, what are the variations that particularly occur in the
prakaöa vraja-lélä?” 

Gosvämé, “The prakaöa vraja-lélä manifest upon this earthly plane by the Lord’s
mercy is of two varieties: nitya, perpetual; and naimittika, occasional. In
Vraja-gokula, the añöa-käléya-lélä, eightfold daily pastimes, are nitya-lélä,
whereas the killing of the asuras such as Pütanä and the sudüra-praväsa are
naimittika-lélä.” 

Vijaya, “Prabhu, could you explain a little of the nitya-lélä of the Lord?”

Gosvämé, “Two authorized versions of this subject are available. One is composed
by the ancient åñis in Sanskrit, and the other is compiled by the great Six
Gosvämés, the disciples of Çré Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Which one do you wish
to hear?”

Vijaya, “I am attracted to hear the version of the sages in Sanskrit.”

Gosvämé,

niçäntah prätah pürvähno madhyähaç cäparähnakaù
säyaà pradoño-ratriç ca kälañöau ca yathä-kåamam
madhyähno yäminé cobhau yan muhürtam ito småtäu
tri-muhürtam itä jïeyä niçänta-pramukhäù pare

“‘Lélä is divided into eight time periods of the day: niçänta, pre-dawn; prätaù,
early morning; pürvähëa, forenoon; madhyähna, midday; aparähna, afternoon;
säyam, dusk; pradoña, evening; and rätri, night. Rätri-lélä and madhyähna-lélä
are six muhürtas each whereas the others are three muhürtas each (one muhürta is
equivalent to forty-eight minutes).’

“Çréla Sadäçiva, in the Sanat-kumära Saàhitä, has ascertained the various
devotional services according to the different times of the day or night. They
are to be meditated upon at the corresponding time of one’s own day and night as
a part of one’s daily bhajana.” 

Vijaya, “Çréla Gurudeva, am I privileged to hear the narrations of Jagad-guru
Çréla Sadäçiva, the world-renowned exponent of bhakti?”

Gosvämé, “Please listen attentively:

sadä-çiva uväca

parakéyäbhimäninyas / tathäsya ca priyäù janäù
pracureëaiva bhävena / ramayanti nija-priyam

“‘Sadäçiva said, “The young gopés of Vraja, who pride themselves in being the
protagonists in amorous pastimes of the pärakiya mood, are very dear to Kåñëa.
They manifest a plethora of transcendental spiritual sentiments for the sole
purpose of giving happiness to Kåñëa, their most beloved lover.’ 

ätmänaà cintayet tatra / täsäà madhye manoramäm
rüpa-yauvana sampannäà / kiçoréà pramadäkåtim

“‘O Närada, you should perceive yourself, in your ätma-svarüpa, spiritual
identity, as a beautiful, charming kiçoré, young girl, residing amongst the
similarly ever-youthful and delightful gopés of Våndävana who are steeped in
pärakiya sentiments towards Çré Kåñëa. Meditate in the following manner: I am an
enchantingly lovely, tender, adolescent maiden of intoxicating beauty.’ 

nänä-çilpa-kaläbhijïäà / kåñëa bhogänurüpiëém
prärthitäm api kåñëena / tato bhoga-paräì-mukhém

“‘Knowing myself to be an eternal maidservant of Çrématé Rädhikä, who is the
source of expertise in the many fine arts of giving Kåñëa pleasure, I find my
greatest and perennial source of pleasure in dextrously uniting Çré Kåñëa with
His dearest love, Çrématé Rädhikä. Even if Kåñëa approaches me directly with
amorous proposals I shall decline, because relenting would be tantamount to
abandoning the selfless service of Çrématé Rädhikä by accepting pleasure
unrelated to Hers.’ 

rädhikänucaréà nityaà / tat sevana paräyaëäm
kåñëäd ‘apy adhikaà prema / rädhikäyäà prakürvatià

“‘I shall forever remain the maid-in-attendance to Çrématé Rädhikä, the most
beloved consort of Çré Kåñëa. I am exclusively and totally devoted to Her sevä
and have more prema for Çrématé Rädhikä than for Çré Kåñëa.’ 

prétyänudivasaà yatnät / tayoh saìgama-käriëém
tat-sevana-sukähläda-bhävenätisunirvåtäm

“‘I am eternally engaged in arranging for the daily union of the Divine Couple
and remain forever fulfilled by my endeavours in bringing Them this ineffable
exultation.’ 

ity ätmänaà vicintyaiva / tatra seväà samäcaret
brähma-muhürttaà ärabhya / yävat tu ñyän mahäniçi

“‘In this way, O Närada, constantly remember your eternal service in your
ätma-svarüpa under the shelter of the vraja-gopés in transcendental land of
Våndävana; your service starting from the pre-dawn brahma-muhürta and lasting
‘till late at night—that is from the niçänta-lélä to the rätri-lélä.’”

Vijaya, “What are the specific engagements in the niçänta-lélä, pre-dawn
pastimes?”

Gosvämé, “In the Çré Sanat-kumära-saàhitä, we find recorded:

çré-våndä uväca

madhye våndävane ramye / païcäçat-kuïja-maëòite
kalpa-våkña nikuïjesu / divya ratnamaye gåhe 

“‘Çré Våndädevé says, “In the middle of the Våndävana forest, surrounded on all
sides by fifty forest groves, lies an enchanting leafy kuïja formed by
wish-fulfilling desire trees, within which stands a bower-cottage decorated with
divine precious gems.’ 

nidritau tiñöhatas talpe / niviòäliìgitau mithaù.
mad-äjïä-käribhih paçcät / pakñibhir bodhitäv api

“‘Upon a bed of fragrant flowers, within the bower-cottage, Çrématé Rädhikä and
Çré Kåñëa lie asleep, intimately entwined in an embrace of the deepest love. To
rouse them I order the forest birds to create a melodious dawn chorus of
warbling and singing.’ 

gäòhäliëgana-nirbhedam / äptau tad-bhaìga kätarau
no matià kurvatas talpät / samutthätuà manäg api

“‘However, feigning sleep, they refuse to separate from each other’s embrace,
which would terminate their stolen moments of bliss. So the Divine Youthful
Couple remain as They are, fretting at the very thought of having to acknowledge
the wakefulness of morning.’

tataç ca çärikä-çabdaih / çuka çabdaiç ca tau muhuù
bodhitau vivdhair väkyaiù / sva-talpäd udatiñöhatäm

“‘Thereafter, the female parrot, Särikä, with her group of female parrots, and
the male parrot, Çuka, with his group male parrots, incessantly chatter with
each other, repeatedly trying to stir the love-smitten Divine Couple, who at
last disentangle Themselves, stretching and sitting up upon the bed of fragrant
flowers.’ 

upaviñöau tato dåñövä / sakhyas talpe mudäëvitau
praviçya kurvanti seväà / tat-kälasyocitäm tayoù

“‘Seeing Rädhä-Kåñëa sitting up sleepy-eyed and blissful upon the flower bed,
the joyful, smiling sakhés approach the Divine Couple and begin various services
appropriate to the time and mood.’ 

punaç ca çärikä-väkyair / utthäya tau sva-talpataù
ägatau sva-sva-bhavanaà / bhéty-utkaëöhäkulau mitaù

“‘Meanwhile, Çuka, Särikä, and the other pet parrots pointedly continue their
discussion. Overhearing their talks, the Divine Couple realize the need of the
moment, abandon Their flower bed, and hasten to their individual homes, overcome
with bhaya-rasa, fear, and utkaëöha-rasa, anxiety.’” 

Vijaya, “Kindly narrate the prätaù-lélä, early morning pastimes.”

Gosvämé, 

prätaç ca bodhito mäträ / talpäd utthäya sa tvaraù
kåtvä kåñëo danta-käñöhaà / baladeva samanvitaù

“‘In the later morning, the call of Yaçodä Maiyä stirs Kåñëa from His slumber.
He lazily stretches out His body, brushes His teeth with a twig, and rinses His
mouth.’ 

mätränumodito yäti / goçäläà dohanotsukaù
rädhä ‘pi bodhitä vipra / vayasyäbhiù sva-talpataù

“‘Then, with His mother’s permission, He goes to the go-çälä with Balaräma,
eager to milk the cows. Meanwhile, O Närada Muni, Çrématé Rädhikä is being
awakened from sleep by Her sakhés in Her own palatial home.’ 

utthäya danta-käñöhädi / kåtvä ‘bhyaìgaà samäcaret
snäna-vedéà tato gatvä / snäpitä lalitädibhiù

“‘Getting up, she brushes her pearl-like teeth with a twig and rinses her mouth,
then her sakhés massage her with various scented oils. Next, she is led away by
Lalitä devé and other principal sakhés to sit upon an elevated seat in the
bathing chamber and receive a pleasant and fragrant bath.’ 

bhüñä-gåhaà vrajet tatra / vayasya bhüñayanty api
bhüñaëair vividhair divyair / gandha-mälyänulepanaiù

“‘Then Rädhikä enters the chamber of dress and ornamentation where the sakhés
smear Her body with perfumed pastes and oils, dress and decorate Her with finery
and invaluable jewellery, entwine fragrant flower-strands round around Her neck
and black tresses, and cool Her brow with sandalwood paste.’

tataç ca sva-janais tasyäh / çuçrüñäà präpya yatnataù
paktum ahüyate sv-annaà / sa sakhé sä yaçodayä

“‘In this way, the sakhés render all kinds of expert services to Rädhä,
completely satisfying Her. At about the same time, Yaçodä Maiyä sends for
Rädhikä to come to Nanda-bhavan and cook for Kåñëa.’

närada uväca

katham ahüyate devi / päkärthaà sä yaçodayä
satéñu päkatåéñu ca / rohiëé pramukhäsv api

“‘Surprised, Närada Muni asks, “Why does Yaçodä devé send for Rädhä when so many
expert cooks such as Rohiëé devé are present in Nanda-bhavan?” 

çré-våndä uväca:

durväsasä svayaà datto / varas tasyai mudä mune
iti kätyäyané-vakträt / çrutam äsén mayä purä

“‘Våndädevé replies, “O great sage! I have heard from Kätyäyané devé that
Çrématé Rädhikä had received a blessing from the powerful mystic, Durväsä Muni.’


tvayä yat pacyate devi / tad-annaà mad-anugrahät
miñöaà syädv-amåta-spardhià bhoktår äyuñkaraà tathä

“‘The sage Durväsä had blessed Her, saying, “O Devi! By the power of my boon,
whatever you cook will taste more nectarean than the ambrosia of immortality
tasted by the devas; furthermore, such foodstuffs will certainly increase the
longevity of one who takes them.” 

ity ähüyati täà nityaà / yaçoda putra-vatsalä
äyuñmän me bhavet putraù / svädu lobhät tathä sati

“‘Yaçodä Maiyä, knowing of this boon, wants her son, Kåñëa, to eat the cooking
of Çrématé Rädhikä. Being full of parental love and care for Kåñëa, Yaçodä
always prays for Kåñëa to have a long life and relish palatable food; therefore,
daily she calls for Çrématé Rädhikä to cook.’ 

çvaçränumoditä säpi / håñtä nandälayaà vrajet
sva-sakhé-prakarä tatra / gatvä päkaà karoti ca

“‘Çrématé Rädhikä first takes permission from Her mother-in-law and then
joyfully proceeds to the house of Mahäräja Nanda accompanied by Her sakhés to
prepare the kitchen and breakfast.’ 

kåñëo ‘pi dugdhvä gäù käçcit / dohayitvä janaiù paräù
ägacchati pitur väkyät / sva gåhaà sakhibhir våtaù

“‘Kåñëa follows a similar morning routine. On the orders of His father, He milks
a number of cows with His friends and oversees the milking of the remaining cows
by other gopas and then returns home with His friends.’

abhyaìga-mardanaà kåtvä / däsaiù saàsnäpito mudä
dhauta-vastra-dharaù sragvé / candanäkta-kalevaraù

“‘After returning home with His friends, He is undressed, oiled properly, and
bathed by His joyous servants. He is then dressed with a fresh dhoté, sandalwood
paste is applied to His beautiful body, and He is garlanded with fragrant
flowers.’ 

dvi-vastra-baddha-keçaç ca / gåéväbhälo-parisphuran
candräkära-sphurad-bhälas tilakäloka-raïjitaù

“‘Kåñëa is adorned with two garments; one covers His lower body and the other
His chest. Caressing His forehead and cascading down around the graceful nape of
His neck, the wavy black locks of His hair are gathered in charming fashion that
wonderfully expands the sweetness of His beauty. Beautiful tilaka is placed upon
His effulgent moon-shaped forehead, delighting all.’ 

kaìkanäìgada-keyüra-ratna-mudrä-lasat-karaù
muktähära-sphurad-vakño / makaräkåti-kuëòalaù

“‘Golden bangles and bejewelled bracelets decorate His wrists and forearms, upon
His fingers rings glitter, a diffused halo is spread by the exquisite necklace
of shimmering pearls around His elegant neck and broad chest, and with makara,
shark-shaped, sparkling earrings dangling from His earlobes and swinging to
caress His cheeks, He presents an enchanting sight indeed.’

muhur äkärito mäträ / praviçed bhojanälayam 
avalambya karaà sakhyur / baladevam anuvrataù

“‘Now, He is ready for breakfast and Yaçodä Maiyä calls repeatedly; at last,
catching hold of the hand of a sakhä, Kåñëa follows His elder brother, Balaräma,
into the dining-room.’ 

bhuìkte ‘pi vividhännäni / mäträ ca sakhibhir våtaù 
häsayan vividhair-häsyaiù / sakhéàs tair hasati svayam

“‘They all sit in a circle and take a breakfast of their favourite dishes
prepared by Rädhikä and Her sakhés. Throughout the meal, Kåñëa and the sakhäs
enjoy themselves thoroughly by making jokes and witty remarks, causing everyone
to laugh in great mirth.’

itthaà bhuktvä tathäcamya / divya-khaööopari kñaëam
viçramet sevakair-dattaà / tämbülaà vibhajann adan

“‘After the meal, Kåñëa takes äcamana and distributes tämbüla made by the
servants to His friends. Chewing His tämbüla, He then lies down upon a grand bed
to rest.’”

Vijaya, “That brings us to the pürvähëa-lélä, forenoon pastimes.”

Gosvämé, “Yes. 

gopa-veça-dharaù kåñëo / dhenu-våëda-puraùsaraù
vrajaväsi-janaiù prétyä / sarvair anugataù pathi

“‘Kåñëa, wearing gopa-veça, the dress of a cowherd boy, leads the cows and
calves to the grazing grounds outside the village. All the vraja-väsés, immersed
in love and affection, are unable to bear His separation and so follow behind
Kåñëa at some distance.’ 

pitaraà mätaraà natvä / neträntena priyä-gaëam
yathä-yogyaà tathä cänyän / sa nivarttya vanaà vrajet

“‘Before parting, Kåñëa speaks sweetly to His mother and father and respectfully
touches their feet. At the same time, He furtively sends meaningful sidelong
glances to His beloved gopés, thrilling their hearts. Then with pleasing parting
words He takes leave of everyone else who has followed Him and proceeds to the
forest with His sakhäs and the cows.’

vanaà praviçya sakhibhiù / kåédayitvä kñaëaà tataù
vihärair vividhais tatra / vane vikåéòato mudä

“‘Having entered the forest, Kåñëa then delightfully sports with His friends,
creating and enjoying many kinds of games for some time.’ 

vaïcayitvä ca tän sarvän / dvitraiù priya-sakhair våtaù
säìketakaà vrajed dharñät / priyä-sandarçanotsakaù

“‘Then, after engaging the cowherd boys in various duties, Kåñëa quietly slips
away along with a selected few priya-sakhä friends. Suddenly, He feels ebullient
for He is on His way to a rendezvous with the gopés and His most dearly beloved,
Çré Rädhä.’”

Vijaya, “Now begin the madhyähna-lélä, mid-day pastimes?”

Gosvämé, “Yes.

säpi kåñëe vanaà yäntaà / dåñövä sva-gåham ägatä
suryädi-püjä-vyäjena / kusumädyähåti-cchalät 

“‘After seeing Kåñëa enter the forest and disappear out of sight, Rädhä returns
to Her home. The love-smitten gopés are already pining for Kåñëa, so on the
pretext of collecting flowers for Sürya-püjä…’ 

vaïcayitvä gurün yäti / priya-saìgecchayä vanam
itthaà tau bhau-yatnena / militvä sva-gaëais tataù

“‘…Çré Rädhä tricks her elders and accompanied by Her sakhés also enters the
very same forest eager to meet her priyatama, Kåñëa. Thus hoodwinking everyone
and surmounting all obstacles, Rädhä and Kåñëa joyfully meet in the lush groves
of the Våndävana forest.’

vihärair vividhais tatra / vane vikåéòito mudä
hindolikä-samärüòhau / sakhébhir dolitau kvacit

“‘In joyous abandon, They play many games, make amorous innuendos, flirt with
one another, and relish the precious stolen moments together. The sakhés urge
Rädhä and Kåñëa to sit upon a flower-decorated swing; the sakhés then swing the
Divine Couple and pass coquettish comments.’ 

kvaciò veëuà kara-srastaà / priyayäpahåtaà hariù
anveñayann upälabdho / vipralabdho priyä-gaëaiù

“‘Stealing the flute away from an unwary Kåñëa, Rädhä slips it to Her sakhés and
makes signs for them to hide it. Kåñëa runs from tree, to nook, to cranny, and
from one sakhé to another, trying to locate His flute. Çré Rädhikä and Her
sakhés are greatly amused and joyfully laugh as Kåñëa goes from one to the
other, begging for His flute.’ 

häsito bahudhä täbhir / häsitas tatra tiñöhati
vasanta-åtunä juñtaà / vanaà khaëdaà kvacin mudä

“‘The sakhés laugh and make witty remarks that the most attractive Kåñëa tries
to counter by jokes and teasing rebuttals. Finally, after much fun and hunting,
the sakhés return the flute to Kåñëa. Then Rädhä and Kåñëa followed by the
sakhés enter the part of the forest where the groves of tree bowers are
perennially in the bloom of spring.’

praviçya candanämbhobhiù / kuìkumädi-jalair api
niñiïcato yantra-muktais / tat-paìkair limpato mithaù

“‘There Rädhä and Kåñëa take large silver syringes and playfully drench each
other with scented coloured waters made from vermillion and other pigments.
Sometimes, they smear each other’s limbs and bodies with sandalwood, kuìkuma,
and many hues of fragrant pastes, as is done in the spring festivals.’ 

sakhyo ‘py evaà viñiïcanti / täç ca tau siïcataù punaùvasanta-väyu-juñöeñu /
vana-khaëòeñu sarvataù

“‘In the delightful beauty of the forest, the sakhés all join in and assist in
the lélä, especially trying to colour Rädhä and Kåñëa with the fragrant waters.
At the same time, all are soothed by the gentle springtime breezes of the
forest.’

tat-tat-kälocitair nänä-vihäraiù sa-gaëair dvija
çräntau kvacid-mülam / äsädya muni-sattama

“‘In this way, O most exalted of the munis, Närada, the Divine Couple, along
with the sakhés, joyfully pass their time in blissful plays, befitting the time,
place, and Their mood. Eventually, exhausted from such hectic dalliances,
Rädhikä and Kåñëa seek the cooling shade of a large tree and sit down beneath
it…’

upaviçyäsane divye / madhu-pänaà pracakratuù
tato madhu-madonmattau / nidrayä militekñaëau

“‘…upon a divine throne. Catching Their breath, They begin to drink refreshing
honey-nectar. However, as the sweet beverage starts to affect Them, They become
intoxicated, Their eyelids droop shut and soon They fall off into a light
restful sleep.’ 

mithaù päëi-samälambya / käma-bäëa-prasaìgatau
riraàsur viçataù kuïje / skhalat-pädäbjakau pathi

“‘Later awakened by the arrows of Käma deva, Their erotic urges having been
aroused, They enter the inner kuïja of the forest clasping one another’s hands
as Their lotus feet stumble upon the path.’

kåéòataç ca tatas tatra / kariëé-yüthapau yathä
sakhyo ‘pi madhubhir mattä / nidrayä péòitekñaëau

“‘Overcome and almost debilitated by intense lusty desires, They converse in
broken, intoxicated words almost incomprehensibly and engage in amorous plays
just like the mating King and Queen of the Elephants. Also drunken by the honey
beverage and peering through sleepy, bleary eyes, the sakhés stumble out of the
grove sanctum…’ 

abhito maïju-kuïjeñu / sarvä eväpi çiñyire
påthag ekena vapuñä / kåñëo ‘pi yugapad vibhuù

“‘…through different exits to other kuïjas nearby in order to leave the Divine
Lovers alone. Through the agency of His inconceivable potency, Kåñëa expands
Himself to as many Kåñëas as there are gopés and approaches each gopé
individually.’

sarväsäà sannidhià gacchet / priyayä prerito muhuù
ramayitvä ca taù sarväù / kariëér gaja-räò iva
priyayä ca tathä täbhiù / kåéòärthaï ca saro vrajet

“‘Like a kingly elephant infatuated with lust in the midst of many
she-elephants, Kåñëa begins to enjoy untiringly with each gopé, while
simultaneously being most attentive to the pleasure of His dearmost, Çré Rädhä.
Later, after such divinely transcendental love sports, Kåñëa enter a lake with
Rädhikä and the sakhés for water-sports.’ 

vånde çré-nanda putrasya / mädhurya-kåéòane katham 
aiçvaryasya prakäço ‘bhüt / iti me chindi saàçayam

“‘Çré Närada Muni interjects at this juncture, inquiring, “O Våndädevé, how is
it possible that in Nanda-nandana Kåñëa’s nectarean mädhurya-kåda, conjugal
pastimes, aiçvarya in the form of multiple expansions can manifest itself?
Kindly dissipate my doubts.”

mune mädhuryam apy asti / lélä-çaktiù hares tu sä
tayä påthak kåéòaà gopa-gopikäbhih samaà hariù

“‘Çré Våndädevé replies, “O sage, Närada, in Çré Kåñëa absolute and complete
mädhurya reposes, which is actually His lélä-çakti—the potency through which He
performs His unlimited pastimes in Vraja. Expanding Himself, He is able to be
simultaneously with His many gopa friends and sakhés, playing with each of them
separately.’ 

rädhayä saha rüpeëa / nijena ramate svayam
iti mädhurya-léläyäh / çaktir na tv éçatä hareù

“‘However, in His original form Kåñëa gives pleasure to Rädhä. All this is
achieved through the employment of His mädhurya-lélä-çakti and not the
aiçvarya-çakti.’ 

jala-sekair mithas tatra / kåéòitvä sva-gaëais tataù
väsaù srak-candanair divyair / bhüñaëair api bhüñitau

“‘After entering the lake, Rädhä-Kåñëa and the sakhés become absorbed in
water-sports, splashing, jostling, and bathing each other in the lotus filled
lake. Thereafter, upon the bank, the sakhés decorate Rädhä and Kåñëa with
beautiful garments and ornaments, sandalwood paste and fresh fragrant flower
garlands.’

tatraiva sarasas tére / 
ivya-maëimaye gåhe
açnataù phala-müläni / kalpitäni mayaiva hi

“‘They are then escorted inside a gem-studded bower-cottage on the bank of the
lake and seated comfortably upon a beautiful throne mounted with pearls and
rubies. Then, I, Våndädevé, offer Them fruits, berries, and herbal drinks that I
have personally prepared.’ 

haris tu prathamaà bhuktvä / käntayä parisevitah
dviträbhiù sevito gacchec / chayyäà puñpa-vinirmitäm

“‘Çré Kåñëa takes first, served by Çré Rädhä Herself and surrounded by the
sakhés. Kåñëa then lies down upon a grand bed, decorated with streamers of
flowers. At this time only a handful of intimate sakhés are engaged in…’ 

tämbülair vyajanais tatra / päda-samvähanädibhih
sevyamäno hasaàs täbhir / modate preyaséà smaran

“‘…preparing and offering tämbüla, fanning, massaging His feet, and so on.
Kåñëa, luxuriating in their tender pampering, falls asleep thinking of Çrématé
Rädhikä, His most beloved gopé, who Herself is most happy and satisfied to see
Kåñëa resting so contentedly.’ 

çré-rädhäpi harau supte / sa-sakhé moditäntarä
känta-dattaà préta-manä / ucchiñöaà bubhuje tataù

“‘Having gone outside the bower-cottage while Kåñëa rests, Rädhikä and Her
sakhés with great love and delight relish together the remnants of the food and
drinks just offered to Kåñëa.’ 

kiïcid eva tato bhuktvä / vrajet çayyä-niketanam
drañöuà känta-mukhämbhojaà / cakoréva niñä-karam

“‘After taking just a little of the remnants, Rädhikä’s mind suddenly goes
elsewhere. Just as a female cakoré bird feels impatient to see the lotus-like
face of the King of the Night, the Moon, Rädhikä is anxious to again behold the
blooming lotus-like countenance of Her beloved paramour, Çré Kåñëa, so she
hastens back to beside the bed in the bower cottage.’

tämbüla-carvitaà tasya / tatratyäbhir niveditam
tämbüläny api cäçnäti / vibhajanté priyäliñu

“‘Rädhikä stands there awhile with Her eyes feasting upon Kåñëa’s tranquil
handsome face and His bimba-fruit-like lips, further reddened by the chewing of
tämbüla, then She takes the tämbüla remnants and returns to distribute it
amongst Her sakhés, taking some Herself.’ 

kåñëo ‘pi täsäà çuçrüñuù / svacchanda-bhäñitaà mithaù
präpta-nidra iväbhäti / vinidro ‘pi paöävåtaù

“‘However, Kåñëa, having awoken and dying of curiosity to discover what the
sakhés and Rädhikä are discussing in intimacy, completely covers Himself with a
sheet, feigning deep slumber.’

täç ca kelé-kñaëaà kåtvä / mithaù känta-kathäçrayäù
vyäja-nidraà harer jïaövä / kutaçcid anumänataù

“‘The sakhés are under the impression that Kåñëa is actually sleeping, so they
freely talk about Him, His romantic exploits and other very confidential
matters, all within His hearing. They enjoy themselves, making witty repartee,
freely laughing and joking. Yet, somehow or other, they come to understand
intuitively that Kåñëa is only pretending to be asleep and has ingeniously
overheard everything that they have said.’

vyudasya rasanäà dadbhiù / paçyantyo ‘nyonya-mänanam
lénä iva lajjayä syuù / kñaëam ucur na kiïcana

“‘Immediately they are embarrassed and clamp their lips together, pressing their
tongues between their teeth, overcome by beautiful feminine shyness. Bashfully,
they look askance at each other and sit quietly for some time, unable to speak.’


kñaëäd eva tato vastraà / durékåtya tad-aìgataù
sädhu-nidräà gato ‘séti / häsayanté hasanti täù

“‘However, soon they recover their sportive mood and exchanging clever glances
they silently glide over to the flower bed, suddenly lifting up the bedsheet
covering Kåñëa. “So this is how You have a good sleep!” Playfully they tease
Kåñëa, and all start laughing.’

evam tau vividhair häsyai / ramamänau gaëaiù saha
anubhüyaù kñaëaà nidräà / sukhaï ca muni-sattama

“‘O best of the munis Närada, in this way the time flits by in joyful fun, as
Rädhä, Kåñëa, and the sakhés enjoy jesting and laughter, immersed in mutual
divine love. Eventually, they fall of into an idyllic sleep for some time.’

upaviçyäsane divye / sa-gaëau viståte mudä
paëékåtya mitho häraà / cumbäçleña-paricchadän

“‘Awakening intoxicated with bliss, they all move to a large sprawling divan and
sit comfortably upon it with an air of carefree exuberance. Deciding to play a
game of dice, they set down the rules, the stakes being jewellery, clothes,
kisses, and embraces.’ 

akñair vikåéòatah premnä / narmäläpa-puraùsaram
paräjito ‘pi priyayä / jitam ity vadan måñä

“‘Jesting and immersed in prema, they roll the dice. Within a short while, Kåñëa
is defeated by Rädhä, but demands the necklace of His beloved, falsely claiming
that He is the winner.’ 

härädi-gåahaëe tasyäù / pravåttas tädyate tayä
tathaivaà täòitaù kåñëaù / karotpala-sarorühaiù

“‘Kåñëa approaches Rädhä, looking to take away Her necklace, but Rädhä declines
and chastises Him for cheating with a light slap of Her lotus hand.’ 

viñaëëa-mänaso bhütva / gantuà ca kurute matim
jito ‘smi cet tvayä devi / gåhyatäm mat-paëékåtam

“‘Now looking sobered up and feigning that He might have to leave, Kåñëa says,
“O Devi! If you are the real winner, then I shall certainly award you my wager,
so be ready to accept.’ 

cumbanädi mayä dattam / ity uktvä ca tathäcaret 
kauöilyam tad-bhruvor drañöuà / çrotuà tad-bhartsanaà vacaù

“‘Here are the kisses and embraces that I wagered,” Kåñëa declares and despite
Rädhä’s embarrassed protestations He plants a winner’s kiss upon Her beautiful
lotus lips. Desiring to behold Rädhä’s crooked eyebrows and hear Her words of
chastisement to Her beloved Çyäma …

tataù çäré-çukänäï ca / çrutvä bägäharaà mithaù
nirgacchatas tataù sthänäd / gantu-kämau gåhaà prati

“‘…the pet parrots of the Loving Couple, Çuka and Särikä, and their respective
flocks appear and soon engage in a vigorous verbal battle. In loving
glorification, they insistently dispute the respective virtues of Rädhä and
Kåñëa. Suddenly, Rädhä and Kåñëa fall silent listening to the parrots, as if
this were a sign for Them to prepare for home.’ 

kåñëaù käntäm anujïäpya / gaväm abhimukhaà vrajet
sä tu sürya-gåhaà gacchet / sakhé-maëòala-samvåtä

“‘Kåñëa bids farewell to His beloved Rädhikä, heading back to rejoin the cows,
while Rädhikä also walks away with Her sakhés in the direction of the Sürya
Mandira to offer worship there.’ 

kiyad düraà tato gatvä / parävåtya hariù punaù
vipra-veçaà samästhäya / yäti sürya-gåhaà prati

“‘However, once out of sight, Kåñëa changes direction and, disguising Himself in
the attire of a brähmaëa, also goes to the Sürya Mandira.’

süryaï ca püjayet tatra / präthitas tat-sakhé-janaiù 
tadaiva kalpitair vedaiù / parihäsa-viçäradaiù

“‘Kåñëa is not immediately recognized by Rädhä or the sakhés. Unsuspectingly,
they request Him to conduct the worship and make offerings to Sürya deva on
their behalf. Thereupon, Kåñëa recites several lines of a fictitious and
fabricated mantra that sounds very comical.’ 

tatas tä vyathitaà käntaà / parjïäya vicakñaëäù
änanda-sägare lénä / na viduù svaà na cäparam

“‘O Närada, the intelligent and perceptive sakhés immediately detect the false
Vedic incantations and quickly deduce that the püjäré is none other than Kåñëa
Himself, drawn there unable to bear separation from Rädhäräëé. Understanding
this, they lose themselves in ineffable ecstasy, drowning in the ocean of
prema.’ 

vihärair vividhair evaà / särddhayäm advayaà mune
nétvä gåhaà vrajeyus täù / sa ca kåñëo gaväà vrajet

“‘O Muni, Närada, Over a period of two and a half praharas (approximately seven
and a half hours), the variety of these wonderful pastimes unfolds, after which
Kåñëa goes back to join His friends and the cows in the grazing grounds of the
forest, and Rädhä and the sakhés return to their respective homes.’” 

Vijaya, “Kindly continue with the next käla, the aparähna-lélä, afternoon
pastimes.”

Gosvämé, “Yes, 

saìgamya sva-sakhén kåñëo / gåhétvä gäù samantataù
ägacchati vrajaà karñan / tatratyän muralé-ravaiù

“‘Våndädevé continued, “O Närada, Kåñëa rejoins His sakhäs and to call back the
scattered herd of cows, He plays upon His muralé flute, the sweet sound of which
attracts and exhilarates the hearts of all the vraja-väsés. Expertly playing His
flute, Kåñëa with His friends leads the large herd of cows back to Vraja.’ 

tato nandädayaù sarve / çrutvä veëu-ravaà hareù
go-dhüli-paöala-vyäptaà / dåñövä väpi nabha-sthalam
kåñëasyäbhimukhaà yänti / tad-darçana-samutsukäù

“‘As Kåñëa approaches the palace of Nanda Mahäräja, the faint sound of His flute
is heard in the distance. The tinkling of the cowbells, the dust cloud raised by
the weary hooves of the cows, and the enchanting sound of Kåñëa’s flute signal
His return, spontaneously drawing all the vraja-väsés to hasten in His
direction, deeply yearning to see Him.’

rädhikäpi samägatya / gåhe snätvä vibhüñitä
sampädya känta-bhogärthaà / bhakñyäëi vividhäni ca
sakhé-saìgha-yutä yäti / käntaà drañöuà samutsukäù

“‘After returning home, Rädhikä is bathed and appropriately ornamented and
dressed by Her sakhés. She goes to the kitchen and prepares another feast for
the fatigued and hungry Kåñëa. Then, together with Her sakhés and in anxious
expectation, Rädhikä half walks, half runs to the limits of Vraja, thus joining
the ardent throng of vraja-väsés waiting to welcome Kåñëa.’

räja-märge vraja-dväri / yatra sarva-vrajaukasaù
kåñëo ‘pi tän samägamya / yathävad anupürvaçaù

“‘Kåñëa’s arrival is greeted with tumultuous fervour as all the vraja-väsés
gather on both sides of the royal road. Kåñëa personally returns the greetings
of every vraja-väsé, offering respect and affection according to age, social
status, and so on.’ 

darçanaiù sparçanair väcä / smita-pürvävalokanaiù
gopa-våddhän namaskäraiù / käyikair väcikair api

“‘To some He smiles, to others He speaks sweet words, some He embraces, and to
others He gives meaningful glances. He treats the senior vraja-väsé gopas with
deference, displaying appropriate words and actions.’

säñöäìga-pätaiù pitarau / rohiëém api närada
netränta-sücitenaiva / vinayena priyäà tathä

“‘O muni, Närada, to Nanda Mahäräja, Yaçodä Maiyä, and Rohiëé Maiyä, Kåñëa
offers prostrate obeisances. To His most beloved Rädhä and the sakhés, Kåñëa
responds with modest covert sidelong glances, overflowing with prema.’

evaà taiç ca yathä-yogyaà / vrajaukobhiù prapüjitaù
gavälayaà tathä gäç ca / sampraviçya samantataù

“‘In response, the various vraja-väsés offer blessings, sweet words, worship,
and so on. Then Kåñëa accompanies the cows and carefully puts them safely inside
their enclosures.’ 

pitåbhyäm arthito yäti / bhräträ saha nijälayam
snätvä bhuktvä kiïcid atra / piträ mätränumoditaù
gavälayaà punar yäti / dogdhu-kämo gaväà payaù

“‘Requested by Their parents, Kåñëa and Balaräma enter the house, bathe, put on
fresh clothes, and enjoy a small repast of tasty foods and refreshing drinks. It
is now time to begin the last milking of the day, so the Divine Brothers, Kåñëa
and Balaräma, eager to be there, go to the go-çälä.’”

Vijaya, “That must be the end of aparähna-lélä, afternoon pastimes, and the
beginning of the säyam-lélä, pastimes at dusk, Gurudeva?”

Gosvämé, “Yes. 

täç ca dugdhvä punaù kåñëaù / dohayitvä ca käçcana
piträ särddhaà gåhaà yäti / payo-bhära-çatänugaù

“‘Kåñëa milks several cows Himself and helps His father supervise the milking of
the thousands of cows. At the end of the milking session, Kåñëa accompanies His
father back to Nanda-bhavan at the head of a large group of cowherd helpers
carrying pots containing thousands of gallons of fresh milk.’ 

taträpi mäör-våndaiç ca / tat-putaiç ca balena ca
sambhukte vividhännäni / carvya-coñyädikäni ca

“‘Returning home, Kåñëa sits with His father, uncles, elders, cousins, and
brother, Balaräma, plus the sakhäs, and together they all enjoy pre-dinner
appetizers, consisting of edibles to be chewed, sucked, licked, and drunk.’”

Vijaya, “Kindly describe the pradoña-lélä, evening pastimes at the first part of
the night.”

Gosvämé, “Yes, 

tan-mätuù prärthanät pürvaà / rädhäyäpi tadaiva hi
prasthäpyante sakhé-dvärä / pakvännäné tadälayam

“‘Before Yaçodä Maiyä has to ask, Çrématé Rädhikä sends over to Nanda-bhavan the
sumptuous dinner She has cooked with the help of Her sakhés.’ 

çläghayaàç ca haris täni / bhuktvä piörädibhiù saha
sabhä-gåhaà vrajet taiç ca / juñöaà bandhu-janädibhiù

“‘Sitting with His father, brother, and other sakhäs for dinner, Kåñëa while
relishing the delicacies praises with many clever words the different
preparations and quality of cooking, knowing well that the delicious feast been
sent by His beloved, Çré Rädhä.’ 

pakvännäni gåhétvä täù / sakhyas tatra samägatäù
bahüny eva punas täni / pradattäni yaçodayä

“‘Afterwards, Kåñëa accompanies the joyful entourage of His father, friends, and
relatives into the splendid assembly hall, where speech-makers, ballad singers,
and dancers are waiting to entertain with wonderful song and dance.’ 

sakhyä tatra tay
 dattaà / kåñëocchiñöaà tathä rahaù
sarvaà täbhiù samänéya / rädhikäyai nivedyate

“‘At the same time, Yaçodä Maiyä makes a large package of all the food
preparations sent by Rädhä and gives it to the sakhés who had brought the
dinner. The gopé Dhaniñöhä secretly obtains and adds Kåñëa’s personal remnants
to the package, which soon arrives at the house of Rädhikä, where the sakhés
offer everything to Çrématé in a secluded place. With the deepest affection, in
return Rädhikä distributes Kåñëa’s remnants to all the sakhés and they sit
together, relishing every morsel with great delight, immersed in prema.’

säpi bhuktvä sakhé-vargä yutä tad-anupürvaçaù
sakhébhir maëòitä tiñöhet / abhisarttuà samudyatä

“‘Having enjoyed the remnants, the sakhés dress and prepare the joyful Çrématé
Rädhäräëé very charmingly for Her nocturnal abhisära, lover’s rendezvous, with
Her beloved Çyäma.’”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I am most keen to hear the rätri-lélä, pastimes in the
night.” 

Gosvämé, “Certainly,

prasthäpyate mayä käcid / ata eva tataù sakhé
tathäbhisäritäbhiç ca / yamunäyäù samépataù
kalpa-våkñe nikuïja ‘smin / divya-ratnamaye gåhe
sita-kåñëa-niçäyogyä / veçayitvä sakhé-yutä 

“‘Çré Våndä devé says, “I send a düté to Çré Rädhä to confirm whether it is the
fortnight of the waxing or the waning moon, and after consultation with this
düté, Çré Rädhä chooses accordingly the colours of Her dress and jewellery,
which are darkish during the kåñëa-pakña, waning fortnight, and light during the
çukla-pakña, waxing fortnight. Rädhikä then secretly accompanies Her sakhés to
the bank of the Yämuna, where she enters the divine nikuïja, love-grove palace,
which is beautifully furbished with all the gems and divine wealth of Goloka and
well shaded by the leafy bowers of many kalpa-våkña desire trees.’ 

kåñëo ‘pi vividhas tatra / dåñövä kautühalaà tataù
kätyäyanyä manojïäni / çrutväpi gétakäny api

“‘Meanwhile, Kåñëa relaxes in the assembly hall of His father, watching various
expert entertainers performing marvellously and listens captivated to the
enthralling strains of the Kätyäyané-saìgéta.’ 

dhana-dhänyädibhis täàç ca / préëayitvä vidhänataù
janair ärädhito mäträ / yäti çayyä-niketanam

“‘In appreciation, after the performances Kåñëa offers gifts of wealth and
grains to the satisfaction of the artistes and then sits upon a splendid throne
to receive the love and worship of the devoted subjects of Çré Nanda Mahäräja.
After a while, He appears a little tired and so is escorted by Yaçodä Maiyä to
His bedroom.’ 

mätari prasthitäyän tu / bahir gatvä tato gåhät
säìketitaà käntayätra / samägacched alakñitaù

“‘After putting Kåñëa to bed, Yaçodä Maiyä leaves His bedroom and goes to rest
in her own room. Feigning sleep, Kåñëa waits a while before—yearning to meet His
beloved—He quietly slips out of the room, taking care to be completely
unnoticed.’

militvä täv ubhäv atra / kåédato vana-räjiñu
vihärair vividhai räsa-läsya-géta-puraùsaraiù

“‘Kåñëa heads straight for the secretly pre-appointed love-grove upon the banks
of the Yämuna. Once there, Rädhä and Kåñëa, joyfully together once more, enter
the splendid forest with the sakhés to enjoy many delightful pastimes of singing
and rasa dancing and various performances of dance and drama.’ 

särddhaà yäma-dvayaà nétvä / räträv eva vidhänataù
viçve suñupatuù kuïje / pakñibhis täv alakñitau

“‘For two and half praharas, ‘till late in the night, Rädhä, Kåñëa and the
sakhés become absorbed in these pastimes of the räsa-lélä and eventually bathe
in the Yamunä. Finally, exhausted and wishing to be alone together, Rädhä and
Kåñëa, employing the yoga-mäyä potency, slip unnoticed from the midst of the
sakhés and happily enter the welcoming bowers of Their love kuïja, unnoticed by
the sleeping birds.’ 

ekänte kusumaiù klipte / keli-talpe manohare
suptävatiñöhatäà tatra / sevyamänau nijälibhiù

“‘In that solitary place, Rädhä and Kåñëa lie down upon a beautifully decorated
floral bed and enjoy divinely captivating amorous pastimes. Later, while
resting, they are gently served by a small select group of intimate sakhés.” 

“Vijaya, I have thus narrated the añöa-käléya-lélä of Çré Çré Rädhä Kåñëa,
within which is found all the ingredients and subtleties of rasa. Whatever I
have explained earlier about rasa-tattva is present within these esoteric
pastimes. Now, meditating upon and entering these pastimes by the grace of
Çrématé Rädhäräëé, render the specific devotional services of your particular
relationship within your group at the assigned times and places.”

Hearing these topics, the learned paëòita Vijaya entered a deep trance of
ecstatic divine love. Tears of prema flowed incessantly down his cheeks, his
body horripilated constantly as within his heart he felt overwhelming spiritual
emotions. His voice faltered when he attempted to speak and he lay down,
offering obeisances at the feet of Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé, becoming oblivious
of the external surroundings for some time. Slowly, when he had regained
consciousness, he got up and gingerly made his way back home. From that day on,
Vijaya was immersed in nothing other than the rasa welling up in constant waves
within his heart.

Thus ends the thirty-eighth chapter of the Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Çåìgära-rasa,
The Perfection of the Conjugal Mellow, Part Two

JDH 39: Entering the Pastimes of the Lord 

Chapter Thirty-nine
Entering the Pastimes of the Lord 

Vijaya-kumära has now grown totally apathetic towards material life and the
discussion thereof. Outwardly, he is seemingly perturbed. When he goes for
darçana of Lord Jagannätha, he is unable to stem the upsurge of his spiritual
emotions. Previously, he had studied the subject of rasa-tattva in a general
manner, but only recently by the grace of Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé has he
actually gained the proper esoteric comprehension of mädhurya-rasa along with
its concomitant sthäyi-bhäva, vibhäva, anubhävas, sattvika-bhävas, and
vyabhicäré-bhävas. Now, after this deeper education, various bhävas have been at
random taking control of his heart for short periods, overwhelming him with
ecstatic emotion. For days, he has been helpless in the face of these rampant
eruptions of spiritual emotion, which seemingly wilfully take control of his
very self. 

So, one day, seeing himself incapable of controlling these effects of bhäva,
Vijaya fell with tear-filled eyes at the feet of Çréla Gopäla-guru Gosvämé,
lamenting, “O Çréla Gurudeva! Although I have learned everything from you, I am
yet incapable of steadily sustaining my sthäyi-bhäva, and so I cannot properly
place myself into the Lord’s lélä. Therefore, kindly impart the appropriate
knowledge and method by which I may learn to do so.” 

Observing Vijaya’s symptoms of prema, the heart of Çré Gopäla-guru Gosvämé
pulsated with joy. Within himself he thought, “It is the very nature of
kåñëa-prema to project extreme ecstasy as dolour and pain as rapture.” Aloud, he
then said, “To enter the pastimes of Kåñëa, you must adopt the correct means.”

Vijaya, “What are those means, Gurudeva?”

Gosvämé, “Çréla Raghunäthadäsa Gosvämé writes in the second çloka of his book
the Manaù-çikñä, Instructions to the Mind:

na dharmaà nädharmaà çruti-gaëa-niruktaà kila kuru
vraje rädhä-kåñëa-pracura-paricaryäm iha tanu
çacé-sünuà nandéçvara-pati-sutatve guru-varaà
mukunda-preñöhatve smara param ajasraà nanu manaù

“‘My dear mind! Please do not perform the religious activities prescribed in the
Vedas, nor the irreligious works forbidden by these scriptures. The ultimate
conclusion of the entire Vedic literature is that the Divine Couple, Çré Çré
Rädhä Kåñëa, is the Supreme object of worship, and that loving service to Them
is the most relishable experience of all. Therefore, O mind, engage yourself
fully in serving Them with love and devotion. Always meditate upon Çré Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, the son of Çré Çacé-mätä, with the understanding that He is
absolutely non-different from Çré Kåñëa, the son of Mahäräja Nanda. Dear mind,
also meditate upon Çré Guru who is a dearmost devotee of Çré Mukunda Kåñëa.’

“The purport is that the devotee must not squander precious time in determining
the distinctions between Vedic dharma and adharma. Instead, he must discard the
hair-splitting logic and stipulations found in the scriptures and fully apply
himself with lobha for the execution of rägänuga-bhakti, devotional service
following the moods of attraction of the vraja-väsés to Çré Rädhä and Çré Kåñëa
in Vraja-våndävana, where there is a multitude of spiritual chores. 

“Service must be rendered in the spiritual mood of Vraja. If there is a question
as to who will teach you this method of service, the answer is that you will be
taught by Çré Caitanya, the Supreme Lord of the heart, who appeared from the
womb of Çré Çacé-mätä in Navadvépa-dhäma, and who is non-different from the son
of Mahäräja Nanda. Never doubt this truth. However, a devotee should never
commit the mistake of thinking that because Çré Caitanya appeared in
Navadvépa-dhäma to teach the unique worship of Çré Kåñëa in parakéya-bhäva that
Çré Caitanya is then the paramour of Navadvépa. Such a terrible mistake can only
pollute the path of worship in vraja-rasa introduced by Çré Gauräìga. 

“Gauräìga is Kåñëa Himself, and therefore those devotees who have taken
initiation into ritualistic Deity worship and have taken shelter in exclusive
meditation upon Gauräìga and upon His mantra—the gaura-mantra—must never be
disturbed by anybody. However, for those on the path of rasa-bhajana Çré
Gauräìga is to be worshiped as non-different from Çré Kåñëa and as being the
most esoteric combination of Çré Rädhä-vallabha and His beloved, Çrématé
Rädhikä. Çré Caitanya is the object of bhajana having appeared as the
pre-eminent guru of vraja-rasa and the exemplification of the devotional life
required for those aspirants of vraja-rasa. Therefore, first remember the daily
pastimes of Çré Caitanya as a part of your worship before you enter into
meditation upon vraja-lélä, because caitanya-lélä naturally evokes añöa-käléya
kåñëa-lélä smaraëa. Further, realize that your guru—on the path of
rasa-bhajana—is non-different from a vraja-yütheçväré-sakhé. If you follow these
prescribed steps in bhajana, You can enter the vraja-lélä of Kåñëa.”

Vijaya, “Guruji, I have now understood that I must relinquish attachment for
scriptural logic and renounce all other paths in order to single-mindedly
cultivate the devotional service that is applicable to the añöa-käléya-lélä of
Kåñëa. I must follow the scriptural mood initiated by Çré Caitanya and execute
my bhajana under the guidance of the guru who is seen as a sakhé. However, how
do I firmly fix my mind in implementing this line of bhajana?”

Gosvämé, “Steadiness in one’s resolve comes from two areas of realization:
upäsya-pariñkåti, clearly understanding the object of worship; and by
upäsaka-pariñkåti, clearly understanding the role and nature of the worshipper.
You have become knowledgeable about the principles of rasa-tattva and the object
of rasa, Çré Kåñëa; therefore, you have accomplished the first—upäsya-pariñkåti.
However, pertinent to the second, upäsaka-pariñkåti, there is the understanding
of the ekädaça-bhäva, eleven items of spiritual identity. You have already
cultivated most of this eleven, but there are more to be understood, and you
should become more firmly established in them all.”

Vijaya, “Kindly enumerate and delineate them.”

Gosvämé, “The eleven items of identity are sambandha, relationship; vayasa, age;
näma, name; rüpa, form; yütha, group; veña, dress; äjïä, specific order; väsa,
residence; sevä, service; paräkäñöhä-çväsa, highest aspiration; and
pälya-däsé-bhäva, one’s particular temperament as a maintained maidservant.”

Vijaya, “What is meant by sambandha?”

Gosvämé, “Sambandha in this context is the foundation. The sambandha, eternal
intrinsic constitutional relationship with Kåñëa, which the sädhaka cultivates
from the beginning of sädhana, matures into perfection at the stage of siddhi.
Those sädhakas who have worshiped Kåñëa as Lord and Master later become His
servitors in däsya-rasa. Those sädhakas who felt the attraction to serve Kåñëa
as their dear sakhä accordingly are positioned in the transcendental land of
Vraja in that role. Those sädhakas whose natural affection for Kåñëa was in the
protective and paternal mood become devotees in vätsalya-rasa. Those sädhakas
who loved Kåñëa as their beloved husband become the queens of Dvärakä in
svakéya-rasa. In Vraja, çänta-rasa in practical terms is absent and däsya-rasa
is faded before the sweet brilliance of the higher rasas. 

“One’s sambandha is established according to one’s ruci for a particular
relationship. Vijaya, you naturally possess a transcendental feminine
disposition plus parakéya-ruci; thus, you are subservient to the Queen of the
Vraja Forest Groves, Vraja-vaneçvaré Çrématé Rädhikä. Know your sambandha-bhäva,
which you must realize, to be, ‘I am the assistant to the most confidential
sakhé of Çrématé Rädhikä. Rädhä is the mistress of my very life, and Kåñëa is
Her very life. Therefore, Rädhä-vallabha, Çré Kåñëa, the beloved of Rädhä, is
certainly the Lord of my heart.’”

Vijaya, “I have heard that the great preceptor Çréla Jéva Gosvämé was in favour
of sambandha in svakéya-bhäva. Is this true?”

Gosvämé, “None of the intimate followers of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu is bereft of
pure parakéya-bhäva. Çréla Svarüpa Dämodara Gosvämé is the foremost exponent and
preceptor of parakéya-rasa. He has unequivocally propagated
çuddha-parakéya-bhäva, and Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé, and Çréla
Jéva Gosvämé are his students and fully ascribe to this mood and tattva. Çréla
Jéva Gosvämé being naturally situated in parakéya-bhäva certainly never
exhibited a preference for svakéya-bhäva in his personal bhajana. However, he
took note of the fact that some devotees in Vraja were practising svakéya-bhäva.
At the stage where samartha-rati, boundless attachment, is slightly flavoured by
samaïjasä-rati, balanced attachment, the svakéya-bhäva of vraja-lélä manifests.
Thus, those who at the time of establishing sambandha with Kåñëa are even
slightly influenced by svakéya-bhäva worship later with the influence of that
mood.

“Çréla Jéva Gosvämé had two groups of disciples, one aspiring to parakéya-bhäva,
the other aspiring to a mixed svakéya-bhäva. Therefore, Çréla Jéva Gosvämé gave
instructions that took into consideration both tendencies of ruci amongst his
disciples. This fact is unambiguously conveyed in his composition of the
following çloka in his Locana-rocané öékä on Ujjvala-nélamaëi: 

svecchayä-likhitaà kiïcit…

“‘I have written what is suitable for devotees who are inclined in a particular
way.’”

Vijaya, “Yes, I am convinced that parakéya bhajana is propounded without any
contradiction according to the original pure Gaudiya conception. The topic of
sambandha is now clear to me; kindly elucidate the next item, vayasa, age.” 

Gosvämé, “Based upon your sambandha with Kåñëa, a wonderful svarüpa will
manifest—that of a beautiful gopé of Vraja. Compatible with your service, a
suitable vayasa is fixed—the period between ten and sixteen years is known as
kaiçora, adolescence, and this is your vayasa. In your svarüpa, you will start
at the age of ten and with advancing service you will reach the age of sixteen.
This age range is also known as vayaù-sandhi. The vraja-lalanäs, beautiful gopés
of Våndävana, are not situated the ages of bälya, infancy (birth to five years),
and paugaëòa, childhood (six to ten years), nor våddha, adulthood; so you should
consider yourself eternally a kiçoré and feel and imbibe her transcendent
sentiments.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I have already received a name through vaiñëava-dékçä, but I
would like to have a clearer understanding of näma, one’s eternal name.”

Gosvämé, “In culturing mädhurya-bhäva by hearing descriptions of the services
and personalities of the sakhés, one naturally follows in the footsteps of a
particular sakhé of Çrématé Rädhikä, according to one’s own ruci in bhajana. The
name given to one by the sakhé to whom one adheres is one’s eternal name. Also
one should understand that the name conferred by the guru after he has tested
one’s ruci is one’s eternal name. The sakhés will feel ecstatic pleasure to
address you by this eternal name.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly speak about rüpa.”

Gosvämé, “When you are established in spiritual consciousness as a captivatingly
beautiful young kiçoré maiden according to your ruci, then your constitutional
siddha-svarüpa will naturally be noted and revealed by your guru. Unless one
possesses an inconceivably beautiful spiritual form how is it possible to serve
Çrématé Rädhikä as Her maid?”

Vijaya, “I would like to know more about yütha.” 

Gosvämé, “Çrématé Rädhikä Herself is the yütheçväré, and you will live as an
assistant of one of the eight principle sakhés of Çrématé. Your Gurudeva has
assigned you to the group of Çré Lalitä devé according to your ruci. Based on
the instructions of Çré Lalitä devé under yütheçväré Çré Rädhä, you will serve
Kåñëa, the personification of lélä.”

Vijaya, “Mahäräja, what kinds of sädhakas join the yütha of other yütheçvarés
such as Çré Candrävalé devé?”

Gosvämé, “Incalculable good fortune and sukåti accumulated over innumerable
lifetimes inspires a jéva to nurture mädhurya-bhäva serving under a yütheçväré,
and only the most fortunate of jévas are admitted to the yütha of Çrématé
Rädhikä. Çré Candrävalé and other yütheçvärés also are conscientious and eager
to serve and help accomplish the pastimes of Çré Çré Rädhä Mädhava. Although
they are of the vipakña-yütha, opposite camp, ultimately they have embraced this
bhäva in order to enhance and nourish the rasa, between Çré Çré Rädhä Kåñëa.
Thus, in truth, Çrématé Rädhikä is the only true yütheçväré, being without
equal. She embodies the entire spectrum of abhimäna in Çré Kåñëa’s variegated
lélä, and under Rädhikä’s direction each soul develops his or her constitutional
abhimäna and serves accordingly.”

Vijaya, “What is veña, in detail?”

Gosvämé, “Whatever be your assigned service, you will automatically cultivate
artistry and acumen in its execution. For this perfection of your service,
suitable guëa, qualities, and veña, dress, are required by you. These are
ascertained by your guru, keeping in mind your ruci and sevä.”

Vijaya, “What is understood by äjïä?”

Gosvämé, “There are two types of äjïä, order: nitya, constant; and naimittika,
occasional. The compassionate sakhé who is your guru instructs you in how to
perform your particular nitya-sevä. This is your nitya-äjïä, eternal order, that
you are duty-bound to execute regularly in the añöa-käléya-lélä with all
expertise. Sometimes however, depending upon the situation, a contingency arises
and you receive additional instructions. These are naimittika-äjïä, occasional
orders, and must also be executed meticulously and of course joyfully.”

Vijaya, “Kindly elaborate on väsa.”

Gosvämé, “Eternal residence in Vraja is väsa. You take birth in a designated
village within Vraja as a gopé and later marry a gopa from a neighbouring
village. However, being magically drawn by the magnetic song of Kåñëa’s flute,
you seek shelter of a sakhé and take up residence in a cottage in one of the
idyllic groves belonging to that sakhé upon the bank of Çré Rädhä-kuëòa. This
residence attained because of your sentiment of parakéya-rasa is your väsa. You
reside there immersed in parakéya-bhäva as your nitya-siddha-bhäva.” 

Vijaya, “How is sevä defined in this context?”

Gosvämé, “You are the devoted follower of Çrématé Rädhikä, and loving service to
Her is your only service. If Çrématé sends you to meet Kåñëa at a solitary place
and Kåñëa makes romantic advances to you, then you must graciously turn Him
down, because you must always remember that you are Çrématé’s däsé and as such
you are not free to render service to Kåñëa without Her consent. You must
maintain equal affection to both Çré Rädhikä and Çré Kåñëa, although you should
be eager to cultivate the mood of loving servitorship more to Çrématé Rädhikä
than to Kåñëa. This is the essence of sevä. 

“Your sevä is your specific añöa-käléya-lélä duties and services for Çrématé
Rädhikä. You will find details of your type of sevä in Çréla Raghunäthadäsa
Gosvämé’s book Viläpa-kusumäïjali. This book has been written in concurrence
with the devotional mood of Çréla Svarüpa Dämodara Gosvämé, which he revealed in
his kaòacä, personal diary.” 

Vijaya, “How may one’s paräkäñöhä-çväsa be ascertained?”

Gosvämé, “Çréla Raghunäthadäsa Gosvämé has defined this item of
paräkäñöhä-çväsa, highest aspiration, in two çlokas, 102 and 100, in his
Viläpa-kusumäïjali:

äçä-bharair amåta-sindhu-mayaiù kathaïcit
kälo mayätigamitaù kila sämprataà hi
tvaà cet kåpäà mayi vidhäsyasi naiva kià me
präëair vrajena ca varoru bakäriëäpi

“‘O ravishingly beautiful Çré Rädhe! I am passing my days and nights in torment,
with the singular hope that I may obtain the ocean of immortal nectar, so kindly
shower Your grace upon me. For deprived of Your mercy of what use are my life,
residence in Vraja, or even servitorship to Kåñëa, the enemy of Bakäsura?’ (102)


hä nätha gokula-sudhäkara su-prasanna-
vakträravinda madhura-smita he kåpärdra
yatra tvayä viharate praëayaiù priyärät
tatraiva mäm api naya priya-sevanäya

“‘O moon of Gokula, Kåñëa! Your lotus-like face is always beautifully decorated
with a charming smile. O embodiment of compassion! The place where you always
take Çrématé Rädhikä for amorous pastimes, kindly take me there also, so that I
may serve Your beloved.’” (100)

Vijaya, “What are the characteristics of pälya-däsé-bhäva?”

Gosvämé, “Again Çréla Raghunäthadäsa Gosvämé has aptly described the qualities
of a pälya-däsé, maidservant who is fully sheltered by Çri Rädhä, in his
Vraja-viläsa-stava, çloka 29:

sändra-prema-rasaiù plutä priyatayä prägalbhyam äptä tayoù
präëa-preñöha-vayasyayor anudinaà léläbhisäraà kramaiù
vaidagdhyena tathä sakhéà prati sadä mänasya çikñäà rasair
yeyaà kärayatéha hanta lalitä gåhëätu sä mäà gaëaiù 

“‘There is one sakhé who being steeped in the mellow of intense love has turned
intrepid, shameless, and without scruples. Impelled by this love, she makes
daily arrangements for a lover’s union between her most beloved Çré Rädhä and
Çré Kåñëa, thus enhancing Their pastimes. Being wise and crafty, she teaches her
dearest girlfriend, Çrématé Rädhikä, the art of rasa as well as the art of mäna.
May that sakhé, Çré Lalitä devé, accept me as one of her team and treat me as
her pälya-däsé.’”

Vijaya, “How does the pälya-däsé conduct herself with the other followers of Çré
Lalitä devé?”

Gosvämé, “Çréla Raghunäthadäsa Gosvämé has inducted the complete teachings of
Çréla Svarüpa Dämodara Gosvämé into his compositions; therefore, these esoteric
details are available in the writings of the Däsa Gosvämé. Again, in
Vraja-viläsa-stava, çloka 38, your question is answered:

tämbülärpaëa-päda-mardana-payodänäbhisärädibhir
våndäraëya-maheçvaréà priyatayä yäs toñayanti priyäù
präëa-preñöha-sakhé-kuläd api kiläsaìkocitä bhümikäù
kelé-bhümiñu rüpa-maïjaré-mukhäs tä däsikäh saàçraye 

“‘The präëa-preñöha group of sakhés always keep Çrématé Rädhikä, the Queen of
Våndävana, fully contented with their loving service by supplying Her with
tämbüla, massaging Her feet, bringing water, setting up secret meetings with Her
paramour, and so on. However, I desire to take shelter of those maidservants of
Çrématé who have acquired an even more unreserved attitude than the
präëa-preñöha sakhés, and who thus draw more affection from Rädhikä, and are
privileged to serve Rädhikä unhesitatingly at Her most intimate moments. I take
shelter of these gopé maidservants who have Rüpa-maïjaré as their leader and I
am proud to have them as my çikñä-gurus in devotional service.’”

Vijaya, “How must I behave with other principle sakhés?”

Gosvämé, “This has also been properly indicated by Çréla Raghunäthadäsa Gosvämé
in his Vraja-viläsa-stava, çloka 30:

praëaya-lalita-narma-sphära-bhümis tayor yä
vraja-pura-nava-yünor yä ca kaëöhän pikänäm
nayati param adhastäd divya-gänena tuñöyä
prathayatu mama dékñäà hanta seyaà viçäkhä 

“‘Çré Viçäkhä devé is full of intimate love, expertly organizing the ecstatic
amorous sports of Rädhä and Kåñëa. She brings great delight to the Divine Couple
by her sweet playful humour and the singing of her mellifluent voice that shames
the spring songs of the kokila, the cuckoo. May that Çré Viçäkhä devé be
merciful and teach me the art of music.’ 

“This is the submissive attitude of love you have to cultivate towards all the
other sakhés.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, what should be my attitude towards the vipakña-sakhés?”

Gosvämé, “The following conveys Çréla Raghunäthadäsa Gosvämé’s opinion on this
issue, Vraja-viläsa-stava, çloka 41:

säpatnyoccaya-rajyad-ujjvala-rasasyoccaih samudvåddhaye
saubhägyodbhaöa-garva-vibhrama-bhåtah çré-rädhikäyäù sphuöam
govindaù smara-phulla-vallava-vadhu vargeëa yena kñaëaà
kåédaty eña tam atra viståta-mahä-puëyaï ca vandämahe 

“‘In order to nourish and augment the çåìgära-rasa of Çrématé Rädhikä for Kåñëa,
some sakhés have become sapatnyä, competing lovers, possessing qualities such as
saubhägya, good fortune; udbhaöa, splendour; garva, pride; vibhrama, allurement;
and so on. Çré Kåñëa engages in amorous pastimes with these gopés for short
periods. I repeatedly offer my glorifications and obeisances to these damsels of
Vraja, Çré Candrävalé being chief amongst them.’ 

“This respectful attitude should be maintained towards the vipakña-sakhés,
however whilst executing one’s own specified devotional service there may be
times in the lélä when one may laugh at, mock, or jest with the vipakña-sakhés.’

“The purport of all these teaching is as follows: One should execute one’s
devotional service with reference to the mood and method portrayed in the
Viläpa-kusumäïjali. In the Vraja-viläsa-stava, one will discover how to conduct
oneself appropriately with the respective sakhés. The pastimes of Rädhä Kåñëa
are described in the Viçäkhänanda-stotram; within these pastimes, one should see
the añöa-käléya-lélä and emulate in one’s meditation the standard so portrayed.
The Çré Manaù-çikñä has laid down a systematic procedure for one to enter into
and become absorbed in the pastimes of Çré Çré Rädhä Kåñëa; one should follow it
without guile. One should practice one’s bhajana according to the bhäva of
ecstatic love expressed in the Çré Svaniyama-daçaka-stotram. These five books
have all been composed by Çréla Raghunäthadäsa Gosvämé. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has
exhaustively elaborated upon the details of rasa-tattva. Çré Caitanya Mahaprabhu
personally gave him this service and specially blessed him to fulfil the
responsibility. However, the methods by which an aspiring soul may develop such
rasa in the intimate service of Rädhä Kåñëa have been compiled by Çréla
Raghunäthadäsa Gosvämé from the famous diaries of Çréla Svarüpa Dämodara
Gosvämé. All followers received their particular missions on the order of Çré
Caitanya and were empowered by the Lord for the successful fulfilment of their
particular order.”

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I am very curious to know what further responsibilities were
given to whom by the Lord.”

Gosvämé, “Çré Caitanya instructed Çréla Svarüpa Dämodara to disseminate
rasa-upäsanä, the process of bhajana inculcated with rasa. Accordingly, he
composed his diaries on rasa-upäsanä comprising two sections: antaù-panthä, the
esoteric, internal means of attainment; and bahiù-panthä, the exoteric, external
means of attainment. The esoteric process was entrusted to Çréla Raghunäthadäsa
Gosvämé, as amply exhibited in his books, and the exoteric rasa-upäsanä was
allocated to Çréla Vakreçvara Paëòita, which is the treasure of our spiritual
lineage. This exoteric rasa-upäsanä was passed on to me by Çréla Vakreçvara
Paëòita and from me to Çré Dhyänacandra who has compiled it in a book of which
you are now the fortunate recipient.

“The task and potency to propagate the glories of harinäma was given to Çré
Nityänanda and Çréla Advaita Äcärya. The Lord chose Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé to
explain the principles of rasa. Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé was responsible for
delineating the principles of vaidhé-bhakti; the relationship between
vaidhé-bhakti and räga-bhakti; and the subtle esoteric truths regarding the
präkåta and apräkåta pastimes of Çré Kåñëa in Vraja. 

“To Çréla Jéva Gosvämé, via Çré Nityänanda and Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé, the Lord
ordered that the principles of sambandha, abhidheya, and prayojana be properly
analysed and annotated. In this manner, the chief followers of the Lord set out
to execute their assigned missions.”

Vijaya, “What responsibility was allotted to Çréla Rämänanda Räya?”

Gosvämé, “Çré Caitanya instructed Çréla Rämänanda Räya to broadcast the glories
of rasa-tattva, which Çréla Rämänanda Räya accomplished through Çréla Rüpa
Gosvämé.”

Vijaya, “Did Çréla Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya have a specific duty?”

Gosvämé, “Çréla Särvabhauma was responsible for teaching the tattva of
devotional service and surrender, which he passed on to Çréla Jéva Gosvämé
through one of his disciples.”

Vijaya, “What responsibility was given to the preceptors of Gaudiya Vaisnavism
in general?”

Gosvämé, “Their responsibility is to inspire faith in devotional service to
Kåñëa in humanity at large, as set down in the process introduced by Çré
Caitanya. 

“Through some preceptors, the Lord taught rasa-tattva through the process of
rasa-kértana, the melodic chanting of songs elucidating the spiritual mellows.
From the empowered genius of these kértanéyas, a vast ocean of kértana-çästra
flowed, which now floods the land with instructive devotional songs.”

Vijaya, “What instructions were given to Çréla Raghunätha Bhaööa Gosvämé?”

Gosvämé, “Çréla Raghunätha Bhaööa Gosvämé was told to propagate the pre-eminence
and glories of the Çrémad Bhägavatam.”

Vijaya, “What responsibility was given to Çréla Gopäla Bhaööa Gosvämé?”

Gosvämé, “Çréla Gopäla Bhaööa Gosvämé carried the responsibility of writing
treatises by which one can easily detect and expose aberrant philosophies and
practices adulterating the teachings of pure çåìgära-rasa. Simultaneously, he
was to ensure that the importance of vaidhé-bhakti was understood and followed.”

Vijaya, “Did Çréla Prabodhänanda Sarasvaté, uncle and guru of Çréla Gopäla
Bhaööa Gosvämé, have an assignment from the Lord?”

Gosvämé, “Yes, by the blessings of the Lord, he established and exhibited to the
world in his ecstatic writings that the esoteric path of loving devotional
surrender steeped in the sentiments of Vraja is the acme of spiritual
realization.”

Vijaya felt great exultation upon hearing how these illustrious personalities
had became humble instruments unfolding the munificent plans of the Supreme Lord
and felt himself most blessed.

Thus ends the thirty-ninth chapter of the Jaiva-dharma, entitled: Entering the
Pastimes of the Lord 

JDH 40: Sampatti-daçä: The State of Perfection

Chapter Forty
Sampatti-daçä: The State of Perfection

Vijaya-kumara pondering deeply had concluded, “By hearing the pastimes of Vraja,
I have naturally developed lobha within my heart for that lélä, and thus I will
be gradually elevated to sampatti-daçä, the perfection of life—attainment of the
ultimate transcendental goal.” Understanding and inspired by this, Vijaya now
considered it important to clarify some points on the gradual ascension to
sampatti-daçä, so with this in mind he approached Çré Gopäla-guru Gosvämé,
humbly enquiring, “Gurudeva, how many daçäs, levels, are there from sravaëam on
up to the stage of perfection known as sampatti-daçä?”

Gosvämé, “All in all there are five daçä: çravaëa-daçä, hearing; varaëa-daçä,
acceptance; smaraëa-daçä, remembrance; bhävapäïä-daçä, attainment of ecstatic
spiritual emotion; and prema-sampatti-daçä, attainment of the ultimate goal,
kåñëa-prema.”

Vijaya, “Kindly describe çravaëa-daçä.”

Gosvämé, “When a person develops faith in hearing Kåñëa conscious topics we
understand that his taste for the inane and mundane has decreased, and that
correspondingly his desire for esoteric transcendence has increased. Kåñëa
conscious topics should be heard from an elevated devotee, as explained in the
Çrémad Bhägavatam, 4.29.40: 

tasmin mahan-mukharitä madhubhic-caritra-
péyüña-çeña-saritaù paritaù sravanti
tä ye pibanty avitåño nåpa gäòha-karëais
tän na spåçanty açana-tåò-bhaya-çoka-mohäù

“‘O king, if one gets the chance to hear from elevated saints the topics of the
qualities of Çré Kåñëa, which are like a flowing river of nectar, and drinks
this nectar with single-minded absorption and faith, then hunger, thirst, fear,
lamentation, illusion and other such unwanted detriments will never be able to
assail one.’” 

Vijaya, “Occasionally, materially engrossed people feel interested to hear Kåñëa
conscious topics, what is the nature of such hearing?”

Gosvämé, “There is a gulf of difference between a person who is bahirmukha,
constantly attracted by external material nature, and a person who is
antarmukha, looking inwards to the real self and the Supreme Lord. For
bahirmukha materialistic persons hearing about Kåñëa occurs by chance, not
because of applied çraddhä. However, such hearing is designated as
bhakty-unmukhé-sukåti, piety based on nascent devotional inclination, and if
continued may eventually beget çraddhä in some later life. However, having
gained çraddhä the eager sädhaka thirsts to hear the qualities and pastimes of
Çré Kåñëa from an elevated devotee; this is the required condition for hearing
at çravaëa-daçä. Çravaëa-daçä is of two types: krama-çuddha-çravaëa-daçä,
hearing in proper sequence; and krama-héna-çravaëa-daçä, hearing in a haphazard
fashion.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly explain krama-héna-çravaëa-daçä.” 

Gosvämé, “Hearing the different pastimes of Kåñëa in an improper sequence and
manner is known as krama-héna-çravaëa-daçä. In addition, hearing without
aspiration to a particular rasa results in a barrier to the flow of rasa, thus
preventing the hearer from finding entrance to the pastimes.” 

Vijaya, “Kindly explain krama-çuddha-çravaëa-daçä.” 

Gosvämé, “Kåñëa-lélä should be heard in proper sequence with resolute
enlightened intelligence by a soul thirsting to augment rasa, then such focused
hearing becomes conducive to the actual evocation of rasa. In this manner
hearing the nitya-lélä of añöa-käléya-lélä and the naimittika-lélä, such as of
the birth of Kåñëa, is krama-çuddha-çravaëa-daçä. On the path of bhajana,
constant engagement in this krama-çuddha-çravaëa is essential for the proper and
successful unfolding of bhakti-rasa.

“The sweet relish of the Lord’s pastimes is progressively manifested through
committed krama-çuddha-çravaëa, and thus the hearer’s latent taste for
rägänuga-bhakti is spontaneously aroused. The hearer thinks, ‘Oh, how wonderful
is the sakhya-bhäva of Subala. I wish to serve Kåñëa in that mood of camaraderie
exhibited by Subala.’ This eager tendency is called lobha. Pursuing with lobha
the devotional sentiments of the residents of Vraja is the essence of
rägänuga-bhakti. 

“I have given an example of sakhya-rasa, similarly in the other three
rasas—däsya, vätsalya, and mädhurya—rägänuga-bhakti also finds full expression.
You are eligible for çåìgära-mädhurya rasa by the mercy of Çré Nimäi, the Lord
of my heart. Hence, you have developed lobha inspired by the service and mood of
the vraja-gopés, and this lobha has brought you to your present path of
attainment. The confidential instructions given by the guru to his disciple for
the evocation of rasa are in essence çravaëa-daçä.” 

Vijaya, “At what level is çravaëa-daçä completed?”

Gosvämé, “When the sädhaka comes to perceive kåñëa-lélä as transcendental and
eternal, he completes çravaëa-daçä. Since kåñëa-lélä is on the platform of pure
transcendence, the léläs are enchanting, and so the devotee becomes eager to
gain entrance to them. Then, seeing the dexterity of his disciple, the guru
enumerates to his disciple—who is still a rägänuga-sädhaka following the
rägätmikä-bhakti of the vraja-väsés—the eka-daça-bhäva that I have explained
previously. When the disciple’s consciousness has become nicely tuned to the
ecstatic transcendental dynamism of kåñëa-lélä, çravaëa-daçä is consummated. The
disciple’s lobha and ruci are then unrestrained, and he is promoted to
varaëa-daçä, the stage of acceptance.”

Vijaya, “What are the symptoms of varaëa-daçä?”

Gosvämé, “The heart’s spontaneous attraction is linked by the chain of the
eka-daça-bhäva to kåñëa-lélä. The heart of the disciple in whom the
eka-daça-bhäva is established is inundated with thirsting spiritual emotions; he
comes weeping and throws himself at the lotus feet of his guru. At this
juncture, the guru reveals his sakhé form, and the disciple realizes his form as
the gopé maidservant of his guru-sakhé. The disciple-turned-young-gopé is
yearning to serve ‘her’ dear Çré Kåñëa; and the guru is a beautiful
vraja-gopé-sakhé who has already attained the highest perfection. The disciple
gives expression to his bhäva at this juncture by the following çlokas, eleven
and twelve, from Çré Çré Prema-marandäkhya-stava-räja, Regal Prayers Bearing the
Nectar of Pure Love, of Çréla Raghunäthadäsa Gosvämé:

tväà natvä yacate dhåtvä
tåëaà dantair ayaà janaù
sva-däsyämåta-sekena
jévayämuà su-duùkhitam

na muïcec charaëa-yätam
api duñöaà dayämayaù
ato gändharvike hä hä
muïcainaà naiva tädåçam 

“‘O Rädhikä! This most despicable and fallen soul throws herself at Your feet.
Holding straw between the teeth I impetrate you, to shower upon this
inconsolable wretch the immortal nectar of servitorship at Your feet, thereby
resuscitating her. The kind-hearted never abandon those who are surrendered to
them. Thus, compassionate as You are, do not forsake me, a soul surrendered to
You. I am anxious to serve the Divine Couple in Vraja under the shade of Your
lotus feet.’ 

“This mood of surrender and heartfelt yearning for the intimate service of Çré
Çré Rädhä Kåñëa permeates the devotee’s devotional fervour in varaëa-daçä. Now
the guru in his form as a sakhé gives his disciple residence in Vraja,
instructing him to meditate upon kåñëa-lélä through the añöa-käléya-lélä and to
take full shelter in chanting harinäma and assures him that soon his heart’s
desire of intimate loving service will be realized.”

Vijaya, “Kindly elaborate upon smaraëa-daçä.”

Gosvämé, “Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé states in the Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, Purva
Vibhäga, 1.2.294-6:

kåñëaà smaran janaà cäsya preñöhaà nija-saméhitam
tat-tat-kathä-rataç cäsau kuryäd väsaà vraje sadä

“‘One should always think of Kåñëa within oneself and should choose a very dear
devotee who is a servitor of Kåñëa in Våndävana. One should constantly engage in
topics about that servitor and his or her loving relationship with Kåñëa, and
one should live in Våndävana. If one is physically unable to go to Våndävana, he
should live there mentally.’

sevä sädhaka-rüpeëa siddha-rüpeëa cätra hi
tad-bhäva-lipsunä kärya vraja-lokänusärataù

“‘In the transcendental realm of Vraja-dhäma one should serve the Supreme Lord,
Çré Kåñëa, with feelings similar to that of His associates, and one should place
himself under the direct guidance of a particular associate of Kåñëa, following
in his or her footsteps. This method is applicable both in the stage of sädhana
and in the stage of sädhya, when one is a siddha-puruña, a spiritually perfected
soul.’

çravaëotkértanädéni vaidha-bhakty-uditäni tu
yäny aìgäni ca täny atra vijïeyäni manéñibhiù 

“‘According to spiritual preceptors, the essential accessories of vaidhé-bhakti
such as çravaëam, loud kértanam, and so on, are still most suitable and should
be continued for the cultivation of rägänuga-bhakti.’”

Before Çréla Gosvämé could explain the purport of these verses, Vijaya eagerly
interjected, asking, “Gurudeva, what is meant here by kuryäd väsaà vraje sadä?” 

Gosvämé, “Çréla Jéva Gosvämé has stated that the devotee should reside
physically in Vraja. If he cannot be present there physically, then he should
dwell in Vraja within his mind. Residence within the mind and physical residence
in Vraja both bestow the attainment of the final goal. The devotee must always
meditate upon Kåñëa and the sakhé whose bhäva he is emulating, knowing that he
in his internal svarüpa is her assistant kuïja-sevikä for the rendering of
service to Çré Çré Rädhä and Kåñëa in the love groves of Vraja. 

“As a sädhaka, the aspirant must continue to perform çravaëaà, kértanaà,
smaraëaà, päda-sevanam, arcanaà, vandanaà, däsyaà, sakhyam, and ätmä-nivedanam
in his external gross body though they form the limbs of vaidhé-bhakti. However,
having acquired the eka-daça-bhäva of intimate worship, the sädhaka evokes in
meditation his spiritual identity as a perfect vraja-gopé and executes his
specific duties in the añöa-käléya-kåñëa-lélä that are allocated to him by his
sakhé leader. The sädhaka must maintain and discipline his external life upon
earth according to scriptural norms and internally nourish his siddha-deha,
spiritual identity, by bhäva. Such an arrangement will ensure a growing distaste
for things and subjects not related to vraja-lélä.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, I desire to understand this system still more clearly.”

Gosvämé, “The purport of vraja-väsa, residence in Vraja, is to live in solitude
with a consciousness steeped in transcendence and bhäva. Chanting harinäma a
designated number of rounds while meditating on practical devotional service in
the añöa-käléya-lélä is essential. Furthermore, one should be always alert that
one’s external activities of bodily maintenance and the like do not neutralize
or deprecate one’s bhajana. Thus, all external work should be carried out with
the consideration that it must be conducive to further development in devotional
service.”

Receiving these instructions somewhat gravely, Vijaya said, “Çréla Gurudeva, I
have understood your instructions, but how do I steady the mind in such
añöa-käléya-lélä meditation?”

Gosvämé, “The mind becomes equipoised automatically as soon as the devotee
actually attains rägänuga-bhakti, because at this level the consciousness
naturally flows to vraja-lélä, being spontaneously attached to bhakti.
Concomitantly, there is a lack of interest in mundane matters, and thus the
sädaka’s consciousness shies away from materialistic involvement. However, if
there are still hindrances and material perturbations upon this path, then one
should carefully follow the krama, gradual, course that I have mentioned
previously. Then, once the mind and consciousness are fixed and steady by the
resultant purification, nothing will be able to unsettle them.”

Vijaya, “Kindly explain the krama course.”

Gosvämé, “Every day, confining himself to a solitary place and determinedly
repelling the attacks of material attraction, the devotee must spend a fixed
period sincerely chanting harinäma, while maintaining within his heart bhäva.
Gradually, this period of chanting should be increased. Eventually, the stage
will come when the devotee begins to feel continually engulfed
alaukika-cinmaya-bhäva, uncommon transcendental emotion, then any impediments or
disturbances will be afraid to approach him.”

Vijaya, “How long should this stage last?”

Gosvämé, “One should continue until all distractions vanish, and there is not
the faintest possibility of the distractions reoccurring.” 

Vijaya, “Gurudeva, kindly clarify what you mean by chanting harinäma while
maintaining within the heart bhäva.”

Gosvämé, “To begin with, chant harinäma with ulläsa, joy, in your heart; then,
gradually combine mamatä, possessive attachment, with that ulläsa; next, to this
nectarean mixture add viçrambha, loving intimacy based on firm faith and
confidence in the Lord. Chanting in this manner will gradually purify one’s
consciousness and increasingly strengthen one’s bhäva, until finally
çuddha-bhäva will begin to manifest. 

“Bhävapäïä-daçä commences from this point. In the state of smaraëa, bhäva is
interpolated and not spontaneously evoked. However, when the sädhaka attains
bhävapäïä daçä, then çuddha-bhäva appears by the natural course of devotional
practice and is known as prema. For the upäsaka devotee, these ascending levels
of niñöhä manifest in this particular sequence and are known as upäsanä-niñöhä,
steadiness in worship. Thus, there is a specific sequence known as
upäsya-niñöhä, steady development towards one’s worshipable object.”

Vijaya, “Kindly elucidate the sequence of upäsya-niñöhä?”

Gosvämé, “If one is keen on attaining prema that is asaìkucita-prema-daçä, fully
bloomed, then one must follow the advice of Çréla Raghunäthadäsa Gosvämé in his
Manaù-çikñä, çloka 3:

yadéccher äväsam- vraja-bhuvi sa-rägam- prati-janur
 yuva-dvandvam- tä cet paricaritum äräd abhilañe
svarüpam- çré-rüpam- sa-gaëam iha tasyägrajam api
 sphuöam- premëä nityam- smara nama tadä tvam- çåëu manaù 

“‘If you desire to live in Vraja with räga, purified spiritual attraction, and
serve eternally, birth after birth, the Divine Couple of Vraja, serving Them not
as a married couple, but in parakéya-rasa, then remember with deep affection
Çréla Svarüpa Dämodara Gosvämé, Çréla Rüpa, and Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé along
with their followers and worship them as your guru-sakhés.’

“The purport of this verse is that when one worships the Divine Couple in
svakéya-rasa, it ultimately culminates in samaïjasä-rasa, a balanced loving
relationship. This prompts the spiritual emotions for serving them to become
saìkucita, ineffective and constrained. Therefore, Çréla Svarüpa, Çréla Rüpa,
and Çréla Sanätana exhort us to worship the Loving Couple in the parakéya mood,
which is without any constraint. Even when—before and during smaraëa-daçä—the
endeavouring sädhaka is fostering çuddha-bhäva in bhajana, then such bhajana
must be done with the acceptance of çuddha-parakéya-rasa, because parakéya-rati,
when interpolated even in the sädhana stages of bhajana will gradually mature
into parakéya-bhäva and finally to parakéya-rati, which will then produce
parakéya-rasa. At this point, the sädhaka attains svarüpa-siddhi, manifestation
of the eternal spiritual form. Indeed, the eternal and permanent nitya-rasa of
the apräkåta-lélä of Vraja is parakéya-rasa.”

Vijaya, “Are there çuddhi-krama, different levels of realization, in
añöa-käléya-lélä bhajana?”

Gosvämé, “After detailing the variegatedness of rasa in the añöa-käléya-lélä in
his Çré Ujjvala-nélamaëi, Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has then articulated the following
in çloka twenty-three of the Gauëa-sambhoga division of the same treatise. Try
to understand the purport:

atalatväd apäratväd äpto ‘sau durvigähatäm
spåñöaiù paraà taöasthena rasäbdhir madhuro yathä

“‘The pastimes of Çré Kåñëa are absolutely transcendental and therefore they are
unfathomable and unlimited. They are unfathomable to the conditioned souls
because it is impossible for them to penetrate through the covering of material
energy and comprehend the çuddha-apräkåta-tattva, pure unmanifest truth, that
lies beyond this mundane shroud.’

“The pastimes of the Lord are unlimited because rasa, the essence of kåñëa-lélä,
manifests itself in an unsurpassable kaleidoscope of proliferating diversities.
Even if a devotee, having attained apräkåta-bhäva, realization of transcendence,
were to describe these pastimes, the narrations would inevitably come out in a
restricted form because of the inadequacies inherent in any language.
Furthermore, if upon some occasion even the Supreme Lord Himself were the
speaker upon the subject of transcendence, still the audience would tend to
misconstrue the topics of His speech, because their consciousness is
contaminated by the mäyä-sakti. Under these circumstances, the unlimited ocean
of rasa cannot be fully fathomed; one may simply remain upon the shore and try
to relish a mere drop.”

Vijaya, “Prabhu, this being so, how then may we ever truly attain apräkåta-rasa,
transcendental mellow?”

Gosvämé, “The sweetness of the nectarean madhura-rasa is unlimited,
incomparable, inaccessible and the very nature of kåñëa-lélä. However, our
Supreme Lord, Çré Kåñëa, in particular has two boundless qualities,
sarva-çaktimän, omnipotence, and icchä-maya, independent, unimpeded wilfulness,
which means He can do exactly as He pleases. Therefore, that which is
immeasurable, unlimited and transcendentally inaccessible is made easily
available by Him within the limited confines of this material nature. Although
this material nature is insignificant and base, the merciful Lord still desires
to manifest His most relishable rasa upon this material plane. For this reason,
His eternal nectarean pastimes and Vraja, the absolute transcendental abode of
the Lord, have appeared within this material creation at Çré Mathurä-maëòala. It
is not for us to question how Vraja manifests and how Vraja remains, because the
activities of the acintya-çakti are incomprehensible to the stunted intellects
of humans and devas alike. Thus, we have received the vraja-lélä of Kåñëa in
Gokula, which is the full manifestation of even His most elevated transcendental
pastimes. Through meditation upon these pastimes, the path to attain rasa is now
fully open to us, and so we have no cause for lamentation.”

Vijaya, “If the präkåta-lélä are of the same tattva as the apräkåta-lélä, then
why should the apräkåta-lélä be considered superior?”

Gosvämé, “There is no doubt that the natures of both categories of lélä are
absolutely non-different; the pastimes graciously manifested here upon earth by
the Supreme Lord at Çré Mathurä-maëòala are ever existing upon the
transcendental plane of Goloka. However, the Lord’s präkåta-lélä may be seen and
remembered by the conditioned souls under the influence of the material energy
even though they do not have full realization of the absolute divinity of such
pastimes. By this process, the perception by the sincere sädhaka of the
präkåta-lélä and their absolute relationship to the apräkåta-lélä goes through a
process of gradual elevation, corresponding to the different levels of
purification of his consciousness. In the initial stages of lélä-smaraëa, the
perception of the sädhaka is clouded. Nevertheless, by the time the fortunate
sädhaka reaches the stage of bhävapäïä-daçä, his consciousness and perception
are free from contamination and thus he can have full realization of the
apräkåta-lélä.

“Vijaya, I am openly discussing these topics with you because you are an
eligible sädhaka. If the sädhaka in smaraëa-daçä performs sädhana with long and
sincere hours, and if his sädhana includes concerted endeavours to attain the
unalloyed çuddha-bhakti of bhävapäïä-daçä, then even in smaraëa-daçä the sädhaka
experiences the inchoate symptoms of bhävapäïä-daçä. The turbidity of perception
that persists in smaraëa-daçä—if it can be completely purged—ushers in
bhävapäïä-daçä, which bestows realization of transcendence. The more one
earnestly cultivates çuddha-bhakti in smaraëa-daçä, the more çuddha-bhakti
increasingly blossoms through causeless mercy within the heart. Çuddha-bhakti is
the only activity that is able to attract Kåñëa, thus by Kåñëa’s mercy the
contamination of consciousness in smaraëa-daçä is gradually dissipated. The
Çrémad Bhägavatam, 11.14.26, states:

yathä yathätmä parimåjyate ’sau
mat-puëya-gäthä-çravaëäbhidhänaiù
tathä tathä paçyati vastu sükñmaà
cakñur yathaiväïjana-samprayuktam

“‘When the eyes are anointed with medical ointment they gain the ability to see
even the most subtle objects, similarly as a living entity cleanses his
consciousness of material contamination by hearing and chanting the
transcendental narrations of My glories, to that same extent he sees Me, the
Absolute Truth, in My subtle spiritual form.’

“The purport is that by being in constant touch with kåñëa-lélä through çravaëa,
kértana, and smaraëa, the ätmä of the seer becomes increasingly purified. To
that same degree of purification, kåñëa-lélä and the supramundane nature of
kåñëa-lélä become gradually manifest to the vision of the seer. A similar idea
is found in the Brahma-saàhitä, 5.38:

premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti
yaà çyämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi

“‘I worship the primeval Lord Govinda who is endowed with inconceivable
potencies. He is perceived within the heart in His eternal form of Çyämasundara
by pure saintly souls whose eyes have been anointed with the salve of unalloyed
love and devotion for Him.’

“In bhävapäïä-daçä, svarüpa-siddhi is attained, which means that the sädhaka
receives transcendental vision and perception of his transcendental form as a
gopé maidservant of his guru whom he sees as a sakhé of yütheçväré, Çré
Rädhäräëé. However, even though at this stage the sädhaka sees Kåñëa, the Lord
of Goloka, and his own relationship in transcendence, until and unless he, the
sädhaka, is promoted to sampatti-daçä, where both his gross and subtle material
bodies are completely terminated, his perception of transcendence is not
continuous and perfected. In bhävapäïä-daçä, the pure soul develops control over
the subtle and gross material bodies, but when Kåñëa completely showers His
ultimate mercy upon the sädhaka, the sädhaka’s relationship with this material
world is totally severed. Another name for bhävapäïä-daçä is apäïä-daçä and
svarüpa-siddhi, the attainment of one’s original, spiritual identity. And
another name for sampatti-daçä is vastu-siddhi, the securement of the ultimate
and absolute transcendental reality, Çré Kåñëa.”

Vijaya, “When vastu-siddhi is attained, in what way are the name, beauty,
qualities, pastimes and dhäma of Kåñëa perceived?”

Gosvämé, “Presently, I am unable to answer that question. If I were to attain
vastu-siddhi, then I would be able to answer your question. However, you would
only fully comprehend such a description if you yourself had also attained
sampatti-daçä. In fact, the effort to understand vastu-siddhi disappears when
one perceives the state upon a first hand basis, because at that point one’s
questions are automatically answered. Even in bhävapäïä-daçä, which bestows
svarüpa-siddhi, to disclose to others whatever one experiences of the
transcendental realm is futile, because the non-qualified audience is incapable
of grasping the description. 

“Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has described in his Bhakti-rasämåta-sindhu, Pürva-vibhäga,
3.29 and 4.12, the symptoms characterizing devotees who have acquired
svarüpa-siddhi:

jane cej jätabhäve ‘pi 
vaiguëyam iva dåçyate
käryä tathäpi näsüyä 
kåtärthaù sarvathaiva saù

“‘If upon external scrutiny a devotee who has just begun to experience the
inchoate stirrings of bhäva is found guilty of misconduct, he must never be
censured because he has now completely abnegated all contact with matters not
related to Kåñëa. This is his crowning success as a human being and he is
glorious in every respect.’ 

dhanyasyäyaà navaù premä
 yasyonmélati cetasi
antar-väëébhir apy asya
mudrä suñöhu sudurgamä

“‘Those devotees whose hearts are flooded with the first flush of prema are
truly blessed. Their activities and conduct are beyond the ken of scholars and
theologians. Only the most fortunate living entities are graced by prema, which
remains inaccessible to the philosophers and professors of scriptures.’”

Vijaya, “If this be so, then why is there an attempt to describe Goloka in
scriptures like the Brahma-saàhitä?”

Gosvämé, “On the occasion of kåpä-darçana, seeing the Lord by His causeless
mercy, in svarüpa-siddhi, the elevated pure devotees, such as Lord Brahmä, have
tried to express their emotions and experience in stavas and in stutis. As a
result of the inadequacies of language their descriptions are brief and to the
less spiritually advanced souls these eulogies remain obscure and cryptic.
However, to exhaustively analyse these eulogies is not of great importance to
devotees. Simply, one should worship and meditate upon the prakaöa-lélä of Kåñëa
that He has so mercifully revealed. This practice will bestow upon one all-round
perfection and thus eventually one will gain one’s own personal perception of
the nitya-lélä. 

“Within a very short time, the sincere worshiper receives the vision of Goloka
within Gokula upon this earth. In addition, whatever is in Gokula is indeed also
in Goloka, because Goloka and Gokula are non-different. Whatever a materialist
is able to see of this transcendental land is but a product of mäyä, but at the
level of svarüpa-siddhi, this aberration is removed. Çré Kåñëa exhorts everybody
to remain unperturbed by their own particular level of perception, which is
according to their eligibility, and to engage sincerely in bhajana from that
point. Mercifully, He gradually purifies the consciousness of those who follow
His advice and rewards them with transcendental vision of the eternal platform.”

Vijaya now felt as if his pall of looming doubts and questions had completely
cleared. Living peacefully upon the seashore in a solitary bhajana-kuöéra, he
practised meditation upon kåñëa-lélä, while harmoniously applying his
eka-daça-bhäva in proper connection with the meditation, thus he was always
immersed in the sweet ocean of prema-sevä.

In the meantime, the mother of Vrajanätha had passed away because of cholera,
and Vrajanätha accompanied his grandmother from Puré back to their ancestral
home in Çré Navadvépa-dhäma. In Vrajanätha’s pure heart blossomed sakhya-prema.
By his bhajana-bala, the strength of his devotional worship, he was fortunate
enough to reside upon the banks of the holy Gaìgä in Navadvépa-dhäma and
associate with many elevated Vaiñëavas.

Vijaya gave up the gåhastha-äçrama and, taking to the renounced order, simply
wore a kaupéna, loincloth, and bahirväsa, loose upper garment. His new spiritual
name was Nimäi däsa Bäbäjé. Surviving on mahä-prasäda and mädhukaré, he spent
his days in chanting harinäma. He completely avoided trivial talks and never
lent his attention to mundane prattle. He was very humble, a paragon of virtues
and steadfast in his bhajana. If anyone offered him mahä-prasäda, or a kaupéna
and bahirväsa, he accepted them only when required, otherwise he declined. 

His daily routine was to sleep a little at the times Çré Rädhikä and Çré Kåñëa
took Their rest, to accept prasädam after They had eaten, and in Their waking
hours, he engaged in devotional service appropriate to Their lélä at that time.
His hari-näma-mälä was in hand at all times. Sometimes he danced, sometimes he
cried, and at other times, he gazed at the ocean waves and burst into peals of
laughter. Who could fathom his bhajana-bhäva, except he himself? When he chanted
harinäma, tears streamed down his cheeks, his voice choked up, and his body
erupted in horripilation. 

Very soon, his bhajana became perfect and Çré Kåñëa by his mercy soon promoted
him to enter into His aprakaöa-lélä. The body Vijaya had used as a vehicle to
perfect his bhajana was interred within the sands of the ocean shore, just like
that of Çréla Haridäsa Öhäkura. 

Gaura-premänanda Hari Hari bol!

Thus ends the Jaiva-dharma of Çréla Bhaktivinode Öhäkura with the fortieth
chapter, entitled: Sampatti-daçä: The State of Perfection

JDH Appendix

Appendix

***********

guru-kåñëa-vaiñëavera kåpä-bala dhari
bhaktivinoda déna bahu yatna kari

Surcharged by the deep compassion of guru, Kåñëa, and the Vaiñëavas, the modest
and meek Bhaktivinoda…

viracila jaiva-dharma gauòéya-bhäñäya
sampürëa haila grantha mäghé-pürëimäya

…has meticulously compiled Jaiva Dharma in the pure light of Gauòéya Vaiñëava
philosophy, reaching completion upon the most auspicious day of the full moon in
the month of Mägha…

caitanyäbda cäri-çata-däçe navadvépe
godruma-surabhi-kuïje jähnavé-samépe

…in the four-hundred-and-tenth year of the Caitanya Era (1896). The pastoral
woods of Surabhi-kuïja, upon the transcendental island of Godruma, hugging the
banks of the sacred Jahnavé Gaìgä within Navadvépa-maëòala, provided the setting
and source of inspiration for this book.

çré-kali-pävana-gorä-pade yäìra äça
e grantha paòün tini kariyä viçväsa

Those fortunate souls who wish to take shelter of the lotus feet of Çré
Gauräìga, the deliverer from the ills of Kali-yuga, let them read this book with
firm faith and heartfelt devotion. 

gauräìge jäìhära nä janmila çraddhä-leça
e grantha paòite täìre çapatha viçeña

However, those who have not an iota of faith and trust in Çré Gauräìga, the most
munificent Godhead, I vow that they may never read this book…

çuñka-muktiväde kåñëa kabhu nähi päya
ñraddhäväne vraja-lélä çuddha-rüpe bhäya

…for the dry empirical philosophers aspiring for liberation will never see the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Çré Kåñëa, the ultimate spiritual goal. However,
the faithful devotee is surely crowned with success as he worships and serves
the pure transcendental pastimes of Vraja within his heart.


***********

The Phala Çruti:
The Auspicious Fruit of Hearing this Book

The Phala Çruti:
The Auspicious Fruit of Hearing this Book

påthivéte yata kathä dharma-näme-cale
bhägavata kahe saba paripürëa chale

As declared by the Çrémad Bhägavatam, all the topics celebrated as religion that
flood the material universes are entirely spurious. 

chala-dharma chäòi’ kara satya dharme mati 
catur-varga tyaji’ dhara nitya-prema-gati

Reject all false religion and cultivate the path of true eternal religion.
Ignore even the four Vedic goals of dharma, artha, käma, and mokña and strive
only towards developing prema, eternal love of Kåñëa.

ämitva-méàäàsä-bhrame nije jaòa-buddhi
nirviçeña-brahma-jïäne nahe citta-çuddhi

Deluded by mundane intellect and false ego, one tries to determine the nature of
the self by mental speculation; at best, this practice may lead one to
impersonal Brahman realization. However, by such endeavour the consciousness can
never be cleansed of material contamination.

vicitratä héna hale nirviçesa haya
käla sémätulya seha äprakåta naya

If Brahman is perceived as being bereft of energy or variegatedness, then it is
impersonal, attribute-less, limited by time and space—and certainly not
transcendental.

khaëòa-jïäne heya-dharma äche suniçcaya
präkåta haile, kabhu apräkåta naya

Mere knowledge of the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth is indeed partial
realization, thus mundane and never transcendental.

jaòe dvaita-jïäna heya, cite upädeya
kåñëa-bhakti cira-dina upäya-upäye

In the material realm, the knowledge solely concerned with mundane duality is
fit to be rejected, whereas in the spiritual realm the eternal duality of Kåñëa
and His servitors is relishable, because devotional service to Çré Kåñëa is
forever both the means and the end.

jéva kabhu jaòa naya, hari kabhu naya
hari saha jéväcintya-bhedäbhedamaya

Neither the living entities nor the Supreme Lord Çré Hari are mundane entities.
They are inconceivably and simultaneously one with and different from each
other.

deha kabhu jéva naya, dharä-bhogya naya
däsa-bhogya jéva, kåñëa prabhu bhoktä haya

The real identity of the jéva is not the material body, and the material world
is not his object of enjoyment and exploitation. The real identity of the jéva
is to be an eternal servant and object of enjoyment of Çré Kåñëa, who is thus
the Lord and Enjoyer of the jéva. 

jaiva-dharme nähi äche deha-dharma-kathä
nähi äche jéva-jïäne mäyäväda-prathä

This book, Jaiva-dharma, does not contain mundane discussions upon how to
maintain the body and enjoy the senses, nor are any words wasted upon
elaborating the mäyäväda philosophy, which foolishly equates the jéva with
Brahman.

jéva-nitya-dharma bhakti—tähe jaòa näé
çuddha-jéva ‘prema’ sevä-phale päya tai

The real nature of the jéva is pure devotion to Çré Kåñëa, free from all mundane
contamination. By practising pure devotion, the consciousness of the jéva is
purified, and as the fruit of such service, the jéva attains prema.

jaiva-dharma’ päöhe sei çuddha-bhakti haya
jaiva-dharma’ nä paòile kabhu bhakti naya

By regularly studying this book, Jaiva-dharma, one develops pure devotion.
However, by not reading this book, one deprives oneself of the opportunity to
tread the path of pure devotion.

rupänuga-abhimäne päöhe dåòha haya
jaiva-dharma vimukhake dharma-héna kaya

Reading Jaiva-dharma surely increases one’s commitment to rüpänuga-bhakti, the
path of bhakti as enunciated by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé. However, one who refuses to
read this book is indeed faithless and devoid of dharma.

yävat jévana jei paòe jaiva-dharma
bhaktimän sei jäne våthä jïäna-karma

The faithful person who makes Jaiva-dharma his life-companion and guide will
realise without doubt that false prestige, empirical knowledge, and fruitive
activity are all worthless.

kåñëera amala-sevä labhi’ seé nara
sevä-sukhe magna rahe sadä kåñëa-para

Such a soul is rewarded with pure devotional service to Çré Kåñëa, thus
remaining eternally absorbed in satisfying Kåñëa and relishing the unlimited
bliss of His sevä. 

***********

